
also by j. k. rowling
harry potter and the sorcerer?s stone
year one at hogwarts
harry potter and the chamber of secrets
year two at hogwarts
harry potter and the prisoner of azka ban
year three at hogwarts
harry potter and the goblet of fire
year four at hogwarts
harry potter and the order of the phoenix
year five at hogwarts
harry potter and the half-blood prince
year six at hogwarts
harry potter and the deathly halows
year seven at hogwarts

illustrations by mary grandpr‚


for jessica, who loves stories
for anne, who loved them too;
and for di, who heard this one first.

text copyright ? 1997 by j.k. rowling
illustrations by mary grandpr‚ copyright ? 1998 warner bros.
all rights reserved. published by scholastic press, a division of scholastic inc.,
publishers since 1920
scholastic, scholastic press, and the lantern logo
are trademarks and/or registered trademarks of scholastic inc.
harry potter and all related characters and elements are trademarks of warner bros.
no part of this publication may be reproduced, or stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without written permission of the publisher. for information regarding permissions, write to scholastic inc., attention: permissions department, 555 broadway, new york, ny 10012.
library of congress cataloging-in-publication data
rowling, j.k.
harry potter and the sorcerer's stone / by j.k. rowling
p. cm.
summary: rescued from the outrageous neglect of his aunt and uncle, a young boy
with a great destiny proves his worth while attending hogwarts school
of witchcraft and wizardry.
isbn 0-590-35340-3
[1. fantasy ? fiction. 2. witches ? fiction. 3. wizards ? fiction.
4. schools ? fiction. 5. england ? fiction.] i. title.
pz7.r79835har 1998
[fic] ? dc21 97-39059
64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 05
printed in u.s.a. 10
first american edition, october 1998

contents
one
the boy who lived ? 1
two
the vanishing glass ? 18
three
the letters from no one ? 31
four
the keeper of the keys ? 46
five
diagon alley ? 61
six
the journey from platform nine and three-quarters ? 88
seven
the sorting hat ? 113
eight
the potions master ? 131


contents

nine
the midnight duel ? 143
ten
halloween ? 163
eleven
quidditch ? 180
twelve
the mirror of erised ? 194
thirteen
nicholas flamel ? 215
fourteen
norbert the norwegian ridgeback ? 228
fifteen
the forbidden forest ? 242
sixteen
through the trapdoor ? 262
seventeen
the man with two faces ? 288




c h a p t e r o n e

the b oy w ho li ved
m
 r. and mrs. dursley, of number four, privet drive, were proud to say that they were perfectly normal, thank you very much. they were the last people you?d expect to be involved in anything strange or mysterious, because they just didn?t hold with such nonsense.
  mr. dursley was the director of a firm called grunnings, which made drills. he was a big, beefy man with hardly any neck, al-though he did have a very large mustache. mrs. dursley was thin and blonde and had nearly twice the usual amount of neck, which came in very useful as she spent so much of her time craning over garden fences, spying on the neighbors. the dursleys had a small son called dudley and in their opinion there was no finer boy any-where.
the dursleys had everything they wanted, but they also had a secret, and their greatest fear was that somebody would discover it.

they didn?t think they could bear it if anyone found out about the potters. mrs. potter was mrs. dursley?s sister, but they hadn?t met for several years; in fact, mrs. dursley pretended she didn?t have a sister, because her sister and her good-for-nothing husband were as undursleyish as it was possible to be. the dursleys shuddered to think what the neighbors would say if the potters arrived in the street. the dursleys knew that the potters had a small son, too, but they had never even seen him. this boy was another good reason for keeping the potters away; they didn?t want dudley mixing with a child like that.
  when mr. and mrs. dursley woke up on the dull, gray tuesday our story starts, there was nothing about the cloudy sky outside to suggest that strange and mysterious things would soon be happening all over the country. mr. dursley hummed as he picked out his most boring tie for work, and mrs. dursley gossiped away happily as she wrestled a screaming dudley into his high chair.
  none of them noticed a large, tawny owl flutter past the window.
  at half past eight, mr. dursley picked up his briefcase, pecked mrs. dursley on the cheek, and tried to kiss dudley good-bye but missed, because dudley was now having a tantrum and throwing his cereal at the walls. ?little tyke,? chortled mr. dursley as he left the house. he got into his car and backed out of number four?s drive.
  it was on the corner of the street that he noticed the first sign of something peculiar ? a cat reading a map. for a second, mr. dursley didn?t realize what he had seen ? then he jerked his head around to look again. there was a tabby cat standing on the corner

of privet drive, but there wasn?t a map in sight. what could he have been thinking of? it must have been a trick of the light. mr. dursley blinked and stared at the cat. it stared back. as mr. dursley drove around the corner and up the road, he watched the cat in his mirror. it was now reading the sign that said privet drive ? no, looking at the sign; cats couldn?t read maps or signs. mr. dursley gave himself a little shake and put the cat out of his mind. as he drove toward town he thought of nothing except a large order of drills he was hoping to get that day.
  but on the edge of town, drills were driven out of his mind by something else. as he sat in the usual morning traffic jam, he couldn?t help noticing that there seemed to be a lot of strangely dressed people about. people in cloaks. mr. dursley couldn?t bear people who dressed in funny clothes ? the getups you saw on young people! he supposed this was some stupid new fashion. he drummed his fingers on the steering wheel and his eyes fell on a huddle of these weirdos standing quite close by. they were whispering excitedly together. mr. dursley was enraged to see that a couple of them weren?t young at all; why, that man had to be older than he was, and wearing an emerald-green cloak! the nerve of him! but then it struck mr. dursley that this was probably some silly stunt ? these people were obviously collecting for some-thing . . . yes, that would be it. the traffic moved on and a few minutes later, mr. dursley arrived in the grunnings parking lot, his mind back on drills.
  mr. dursley always sat with his back to the window in his office on the ninth floor. if he hadn?t, he might have found it harder to concentrate on drills that morning. he didn?t see the owls swoop

ing past in broad daylight, though people down in the street did; they pointed and gazed open-mouthed as owl after owl sped over-head. most of them had never seen an owl even at nighttime. mr. dursley, however, had a perfectly normal, owl-free morning. he yelled at five different people. he made several important telephone calls and shouted a bit more. he was in a very good mood until lunchtime, when he thought he?d stretch his legs and walk across the road to buy himself a bun from the bakery.
  he?d forgotten all about the people in cloaks until he passed a group of them next to the baker?s. he eyed them angrily as he passed. he didn?t know why, but they made him uneasy. this bunch were whispering excitedly, too, and he couldn?t see a single collecting tin. it was on his way back past them, clutching a large doughnut in a bag, that he caught a few words of what they were saying.
?the potters, that?s right, that?s what i heard ??
?? yes, their son, harry ??
  mr. dursley stopped dead. fear flooded him. he looked back at the whisperers as if he wanted to say something to them, but thought better of it.
  he dashed back across the road, hurried up to his office, snapped at his secretary not to disturb him, seized his telephone, and had almost finished dialing his home number when he changed his mind. he put the receiver back down and stroked his mustache, thinking . . . no, he was being stupid. potter wasn?t such an unusual name. he was sure there were lots of people called pot-ter who had a son called harry. come to think of it, he wasn?t even sure his nephew was called harry. he?d never even seen the boy. it

might have been harvey. or harold. there was no point in worrying mrs. dursley; she always got so upset at any mention of her sister. he didn?t blame her ? if he?d had a sister like that . . . but all the same, those people in cloaks . . .
  he found it a lot harder to concentrate on drills that afternoon and when he left the building at five o?clock, he was still so worried that he walked straight into someone just outside the door.
  ?sorry,? he grunted, as the tiny old man stumbled and almost fell. it was a few seconds before mr. dursley realized that the man was wearing a violet cloak. he didn?t seem at all upset at being al-most knocked to the ground. on the contrary, his face split into a wide smile and he said in a squeaky voice that made passersby stare, ?don?t be sorry, my dear sir, for nothing could upset me today! rejoice, for you-know-who has gone at last! even muggles like your-self should be celebrating, this happy, happy day!?
  and the old man hugged mr. dursley around the middle and walked off.
  mr. dursley stood rooted to the spot. he had been hugged by a complete stranger. he also thought he had been called a muggle, whatever that was. he was rattled. he hurried to his car and set off for home, hoping he was imagining things, which he had never hoped before, because he didn?t approve of imagination.
  as he pulled into the driveway of number four, the first thing he saw ? and it didn?t improve his mood ? was the tabby cat he?d spotted that morning. it was now sitting on his garden wall. he was sure it was the same one; it had the same markings around its eyes.
?shoo!? said mr. dursley loudly.

  the cat didn?t move. it just gave him a stern look. was this normal cat behavior? mr. dursley wondered. trying to pull himself together, he let himself into the house. he was still determined not to mention anything to his wife.
  mrs. dursley had had a nice, normal day. she told him over dinner all about mrs. next door?s problems with her daughter and how dudley had learned a new word (?won?t!?). mr. dursley tried to act normally. when dudley had been put to bed, he went into the living room in time to catch the last report on the evening news:
  ?and finally, bird-watchers everywhere have reported that the nation?s owls have been behaving very unusually today. although owls normally hunt at night and are hardly ever seen in daylight, there have been hundreds of sightings of these birds flying in every direction since sunrise. experts are unable to explain why the owls have suddenly changed their sleeping pattern.? the newscaster al-lowed himself a grin. ?most mysterious. and now, over to jim mcguffin with the weather. going to be any more showers of owls tonight, jim??
  ?well, ted,? said the weatherman, ?i don?t know about that, but it?s not only the owls that have been acting oddly today. viewers as far apart as kent, yorkshire, and dundee have been phoning in to tell me that instead of the rain i promised yesterday, they?ve had a downpour of shooting stars! perhaps people have been celebrating bonfire night early ? it?s not until next week, folks! but i can promise a wet night tonight.?
  mr. dursley sat frozen in his armchair. shooting stars all over britain? owls flying by daylight? mysterious people in cloaks all over the place? and a whisper, a whisper about the potters . . .

  mrs. dursley came into the living room carrying two cups of tea. it was no good. he?d have to say something to her. he cleared his throat nervously. ?er ? petunia, dear ? you haven?t heard from your sister lately, have you??
  as he had expected, mrs. dursley looked shocked and angry. after all, they normally pretended she didn?t have a sister.
?no,? she said sharply. ?why??
  ?funny stuff on the news,? mr. dursley mumbled. ?owls . . . shooting stars . . . and there were a lot of funny-looking people in town today . . .?
?so?? snapped mrs. dursley.
  ?well, i just thought . . . maybe . . . it was something to do with . . . you know . . . her crowd.?
  mrs. dursley sipped her tea through pursed lips. mr. dursley wondered whether he dared tell her he?d heard the name ?potter.? he decided he didn?t dare. instead he said, as casually as he could, ?their son ? he?d be about dudley?s age now, wouldn?t he??
?i suppose so,? said mrs. dursley stiffly.
?what?s his name again? howard, isn?t it??
?harry. nasty, common name, if you ask me.?
  ?oh, yes,? said mr. dursley, his heart sinking horribly. ?yes, i quite agree.?
  he didn?t say another word on the subject as they went upstairs to bed. while mrs. dursley was in the bathroom, mr. dursley crept to the bedroom window and peered down into the front gar-den. the cat was still there. it was staring down privet drive as though it were waiting for something.
was he imagining things? could all this have anything to do

with the potters? if it did . . . if it got out that they were related to a pair of ? well, he didn?t think he could bear it.
  the dursleys got into bed. mrs. dursley fell asleep quickly but mr. dursley lay awake, turning it all over in his mind. his last, comforting thought before he fell asleep was that even if the potters were involved, there was no reason for them to come near him and mrs. dursley. the potters knew very well what he and petunia thought about them and their kind. . . . he couldn?t see how he and petunia could get mixed up in anything that might be going on ? he yawned and turned over ? it couldn?t affect them. . . .
how very wrong he was.
  mr. dursley might have been drifting into an uneasy sleep, but the cat on the wall outside was showing no sign of sleepiness. it was sitting as still as a statue, its eyes fixed unblinkingly on the far corner of privet drive. it didn?t so much as quiver when a car door slammed on the next street, nor when two owls swooped overhead. in fact, it was nearly midnight before the cat moved at all.
  a man appeared on the corner the cat had been watching, appeared so suddenly and silently you?d have thought he?d just popped out of the ground. the cat?s tail twitched and its eyes narrowed.
  nothing like this man had ever been seen on privet drive. he was tall, thin, and very old, judging by the silver of his hair and beard, which were both long enough to tuck into his belt. he was wearing long robes, a purple cloak that swept the ground, and high-heeled, buckled boots. his blue eyes were light, bright, and sparkling behind half-moon spectacles and his nose was very long and crooked, as though it had been broken at least twice. this man?s name was albus dumbledore.

  albus dumbledore didn?t seem to realize that he had just arrived in a street where everything from his name to his boots was unwelcome. he was busy rummaging in his cloak, looking for some-thing. but he did seem to realize he was being watched, because he looked up suddenly at the cat, which was still staring at him from the other end of the street. for some reason, the sight of the cat seemed to amuse him. he chuckled and muttered, ?i should have known.?
  he found what he was looking for in his inside pocket. it seemed to be a silver cigarette lighter. he flicked it open, held it up in the air, and clicked it. the nearest street lamp went out with a little pop. he clicked it again ? the next lamp flickered into darkness. twelve times he clicked the put-outer, until the only lights left on the whole street were two tiny pinpricks in the distance, which were the eyes of the cat watching him. if anyone looked out of their window now, even beady-eyed mrs. dursley, they wouldn?t be able to see anything that was happening down on the pavement. dumbledore slipped the put-outer back inside his cloak and set off down the street toward number four, where he sat down on the wall next to the cat. he didn?t look at it, but after a moment he spoke to it.
?fancy seeing you here, professor mcgonagall.?
  he turned to smile at the tabby, but it had gone. instead he was smiling at a rather severe-looking woman who was wearing square glasses exactly the shape of the markings the cat had had around its eyes. she, too, was wearing a cloak, an emerald one. her black hair was drawn into a tight bun. she looked distinctly ruffled.
?how did you know it was me?? she asked.
?my dear professor, i?ve never seen a cat sit so stiffly.?

  ?you?d be stiff if you?d been sitting on a brick wall all day,? said professor mcgonagall.
  ?all day? when you could have been celebrating? i must have passed a dozen feasts and parties on my way here.?
professor mcgonagall sniffed angrily.
  ?oh yes, everyone?s celebrating, all right,? she said impatiently. ?you?d think they?d be a bit more careful, but no ? even the muggles have noticed something?s going on. it was on their news.? she jerked her head back at the dursleys? dark living-room window. ?i heard it. flocks of owls . . . shooting stars. . . . well, they?re not completely stupid. they were bound to notice something. shooting stars down in kent ? i?ll bet that was dedalus diggle. he never had much sense.?
  ?you can?t blame them,? said dumbledore gently. ?we?ve had precious little to celebrate for eleven years.?
  ?i know that,? said professor mcgonagall irritably. ?but that?s no reason to lose our heads. people are being downright careless, out on the streets in broad daylight, not even dressed in muggle clothes, swapping rumors.?
  she threw a sharp, sideways glance at dumbledore here, as though hoping he was going to tell her something, but he didn?t, so she went on. ?a fine thing it would be if, on the very day you-know-who seems to have disappeared at last, the muggles found out about us all. i suppose he really has gone, dumbledore??
  ?it certainly seems so,? said dumbledore. ?we have much to be thankful for. would you care for a lemon drop??
?a what??
  ?a lemon drop. they?re a kind of muggle sweet i?m rather fond of.?

  ?no, thank you,? said professor mcgonagall coldly, as though she didn?t think this was the moment for lemon drops. ?as i say, even if you-know-who has gone ??
  ?my dear professor, surely a sensible person like yourself can call him by his name? all this ?you-know-who? nonsense ? for eleven years i have been trying to persuade people to call him by his proper name: voldemort.? professor mcgonagall flinched, but dumbledore, who was unsticking two lemon drops, seemed not to notice. ?it all gets so confusing if we keep saying ?you-know-who.? i have never seen any reason to be frightened of saying voldemort?s name.?
  ?i know you haven?t,? said professor mcgonagall, sounding half exasperated, half admiring. ?but you?re different. everyone knows you?re the only one you-know- oh, all right, voldemort, was frightened of.?
  ?you flatter me,? said dumbledore calmly. ?voldemort had powers i will never have.?
?only because you?re too ? well ? noble to use them.?
  ?it?s lucky its dark. i haven?t blushed so much since madam pomfrey told me she liked my new earmuffs.?
  professor mcgonagall shot a sharp look at dumbledore and said, ?the owls are nothing next to the rumors that are flying around. you know what everyone?s saying? about why he?s disappeared? about what finally stopped him??
  it seemed that professor mcgonagall had reached the point she was most anxious to discuss, the real reason she had been waiting on a cold, hard wall all day, for neither as a cat nor as a woman had she fixed dumbledore with such a piercing stare as she did now. it was plain that whatever ?everyone? was saying, she was not going

to believe it until dumbledore told her it was true. dumbledore, however, was choosing another lemon drop and did not answer.
  ?what they?re saying,? she pressed on, ?is that last night voldemort turned up in godric?s hollow. he went to find the potters. the rumor is that lily and james potter are ? are ? that they?re ? dead.?
 dumbledore bowed his head. professor mcgonagall gasped. ?lily and james . . . i can?t believe it . . . i didn?t want to believe it . . . oh, albus . . .?
  dumbledore reached out and patted her on the shoulder. ?i know . . . i know . . .? he said heavily.
  professor mcgonagall?s voice trembled as she went on. ?that?s not all. they?re saying he tried to kill the potters? son, harry. but ? he couldn?t. he couldn?t kill that little boy. no one knows why, or how, but they?re saying that when he couldn?t kill harry potter, voldemort?s power somehow broke ? and that?s why he?s gone.?
dumbledore nodded glumly.
  ?it?s ? it?s true?? faltered professor mcgonagall. ?after all he?s done . . . all the people he?s killed . . . he couldn?t kill a little boy? it?s just astounding . . . of all the things to stop him . . . but how in the name of heaven did harry survive??
?we can only guess,? said dumbledore. ?we may never know.?
professor mcgonagall pulled out a lace handkerchief and
dabbed at her eyes beneath her spectacles. dumbledore gave a great
sniff as he took a golden watch from his pocket and examined it. it
was a very odd watch. it had twelve hands but no numbers; in
stead, little planets were moving around the edge. it must have

made sense to dumbledore, though, because he put it back in his pocket and said, ?hagrid?s late. i suppose it was he who told you i?d be here, by the way??
  ?yes,? said professor mcgonagall. ?and i don?t suppose you?re going to tell me why you?re here, of all places??
  ?i?ve come to bring harry to his aunt and uncle. they?re the only family he has left now.?
  ?you don?t mean ? you can?t mean the people who live here?? cried professor mcgonagall, jumping to her feet and pointing at number four. ?dumbledore ? you can?t. i?ve been watching them all day. you couldn?t find two people who are less like us. and they?ve got this son ? i saw him kicking his mother all the way up the street, screaming for sweets. harry potter come and live here!?
  ?it?s the best place for him,? said dumbledore firmly. ?his aunt and uncle will be able to explain everything to him when he?s older. i?ve written them a letter.?
  ?a letter?? repeated professor mcgonagall faintly, sitting back down on the wall. ?really, dumbledore, you think you can explain all this in a letter? these people will never understand him! he?ll be famous ? a legend ? i wouldn?t be surprised if today was known as harry potter day in the future ? there will be books written about harry ? every child in our world will know his name!?
  ?exactly,? said dumbledore, looking very seriously over the top of his half-moon glasses. ?it would be enough to turn any boy?s head. famous before he can walk and talk! famous for something he won?t even remember! can?t you see how much better off he?ll be, growing up away from all that until he?s ready to take it??
professor mcgonagall opened her mouth, changed her mind,

swallowed, and then said, ?yes ? yes, you?re right, of course. but how is the boy getting here, dumbledore?? she eyed his cloak suddenly as though she thought he might be hiding harry underneath it.
?hagrid?s bringing him.?
  ?you think it ? wise ? to trust hagrid with something as important as this??
?i would trust hagrid with my life,? said dumbledore.
  ?i?m not saying his heart isn?t in the right place,? said professor mcgonagall grudgingly, ?but you can?t pretend he?s not careless. he does tend to ? what was that??
  a low rumbling sound had broken the silence around them. it grew steadily louder as they looked up and down the street for some sign of a headlight; it swelled to a roar as they both looked up at the sky ? and a huge motorcycle fell out of the air and landed on the road in front of them.
  if the motorcycle was huge, it was nothing to the man sitting astride it. he was almost twice as tall as a normal man and at least five times as wide. he looked simply too big to be allowed, and so wild ? long tangles of bushy black hair and beard hid most of his face, he had hands the size of trash can lids, and his feet in their leather boots were like baby dolphins. in his vast, muscular arms he was holding a bundle of blankets.
  ?hagrid,? said dumbledore, sounding relieved. ?at last. and where did you get that motorcycle??
  ?borrowed it, professor dumbledore, sir,? said the giant, climbing carefully off the motorcycle as he spoke. ?young sirius black lent it to me. i?ve got him, sir.?

?no problems, were there??
  ?no, sir ? house was almost destroyed, but i got him out all right before the muggles started swarmin? around. he fell asleep as we was flyin? over bristol.?
  dumbledore and professor mcgonagall bent forward over the bundle of blankets. inside, just visible, was a baby boy, fast asleep. under a tuft of jet-black hair over his forehead they could see a curiously shaped cut, like a bolt of lightning.
?is that where ? ?? whispered professor mcgonagall. ?yes,? said dumbledore. ?he?ll have that scar forever.? ?couldn?t you do something about it, dumbledore??
  ?even if i could, i wouldn?t. scars can come in handy. i have one myself above my left knee that is a perfect map of the london underground. well ? give him here, hagrid ? we?d better get this over with.?
  dumbledore took harry in his arms and turned toward the dursleys? house.
  ?could i ? could i say good-bye to him, sir?? asked hagrid. he bent his great, shaggy head over harry and gave him what must have been a very scratchy, whiskery kiss. then, suddenly, hagrid let out a howl like a wounded dog.
  ?shhh!? hissed professor mcgonagall, ?you?ll wake the muggles!?
?s-s-sorry,? sobbed hagrid, taking out a large, spotted handker
chief and burying his face in it. ?but i c-c-can?t stand it ? lily an?
james dead ? an? poor little harry off ter live with muggles ??
?yes, yes, its all very sad, but get a grip on yourself, hagrid, or
we?ll be found,? professor mcgonagall whispered, patting hagrid

gingerly on the arm as dumbledore stepped over the low garden wall and walked to the front door. he laid harry gently on the doorstep, took a letter out of his cloak, tucked it inside harry?s blankets, and then came back to the other two. for a full minute the three of them stood and looked at the little bundle; hagrid?s shoulders shook, professor mcgonagall blinked furiously, and the twinkling light that usually shone from dumbledore?s eyes seemed to have gone out.
  ?well,? said dumbledore finally, ?that?s that. we?ve no business staying here. we may as well go and join the celebrations.?
  ?yeah,? said hagrid in a very muffled voice, ?i?d best get this bike away. g?night, professor mcgonagall ? professor dumbledore, sir.?
  wiping his streaming eyes on his jacket sleeve, hagrid swung himself onto the motorcycle and kicked the engine into life; with a roar it rose into the air and off into the night.
  ?i shall see you soon, i expect, professor mcgonagall,? said dumbledore, nodding to her. professor mcgonagall blew her nose in reply.
  dumbledore turned and walked back down the street. on the corner he stopped and took out the silver put-outer. he clicked it once, and twelve balls of light sped back to their street lamps so that privet drive glowed suddenly orange and he could make out a tabby cat slinking around the corner at the other end of the street. he could just see the bundle of blankets on the step of number four.
  ?good luck, harry,? he murmured. he turned on his heel and with a swish of his cloak, he was gone.

  a breeze ruffled the neat hedges of privet drive, which lay silent and tidy under the inky sky, the very last place you would expect astonishing things to happen. harry potter rolled over inside his blankets without waking up. one small hand closed on the letter beside him and he slept on, not knowing he was special, not knowing he was famous, not knowing he would be woken in a few hours? time by mrs. dursley?s scream as she opened the front door to put out the milk bottles, nor that he would spend the next few weeks being prodded and pinched by his cousin dudley. . . . he couldn?t know that at this very moment, people meeting in secret all over the country were holding up their glasses and saying in hushed voices: ?to harry potter ? the boy who lived!?

c h a p t e r t w o

the vanishing glass
n
 early ten years had passed since the dursleys had woken up to find their nephew on the front step, but privet drive had hardly changed at all. the sun rose on the same tidy front gar-dens and lit up the brass number four on the dursleys? front door; it crept into their living room, which was almost exactly the same as it had been on the night when mr. dursley had seen that fateful news report about the owls. only the photographs on the mantel-piece really showed how much time had passed. ten years ago, there had been lots of pictures of what looked like a large pink beach ball wearing different-colored bonnets ? but dudley dursley was no longer a baby, and now the photographs showed a large blond boy riding his first bicycle, on a carousel at the fair, playing a computer game with his father, being hugged and kissed by his mother. the room held no sign at all that another boy lived in the house, too.

  yet harry potter was still there, asleep at the moment, but not for long. his aunt petunia was awake and it was her shrill voice that made the first noise of the day.
?up! get up! now!?
harry woke with a start. his aunt rapped on the door again.
  ?up!? she screeched. harry heard her walking toward the kitchen and then the sound of the frying pan being put on the stove. he rolled onto his back and tried to remember the dream he had been having. it had been a good one. there had been a flying motorcycle in it. he had a funny feeling he?d had the same dream before.
his aunt was back outside the door.
?are you up yet?? she demanded.
?nearly,? said harry.
  ?well, get a move on, i want you to look after the bacon. and don?t you dare let it burn, i want everything perfect on duddy?s birthday.?
harry groaned.
?what did you say?? his aunt snapped through the door. ?nothing, nothing . . .?
  dudley?s birthday ? how could he have forgotten? harry got slowly out of bed and started looking for socks. he found a pair under his bed and, after pulling a spider off one of them, put them on. harry was used to spiders, because the cupboard under the stairs was full of them, and that was where he slept.
  when he was dressed he went down the hall into the kitchen. the table was almost hidden beneath all dudley?s birthday presents. it looked as though dudley had gotten the new computer he

wanted, not to mention the second television and the racing bike. exactly why dudley wanted a racing bike was a mystery to harry, as dudley was very fat and hated exercise ? unless of course it involved punching somebody. dudley?s favorite punching bag was harry, but he couldn?t often catch him. harry didn?t look it, but he was very fast.
  perhaps it had something to do with living in a dark cupboard, but harry had always been small and skinny for his age. he looked even smaller and skinnier than he really was because all he had to wear were old clothes of dudley?s, and dudley was about four times bigger than he was. harry had a thin face, knobbly knees, black hair, and bright green eyes. he wore round glasses held together with a lot of scotch tape because of all the times dudley had punched him on the nose. the only thing harry liked about his own appearance was a very thin scar on his forehead that was shaped like a bolt of lightning. he had had it as long as he could re-member, and the first question he could ever remember asking his aunt petunia was how he had gotten it.
  ?in the car crash when your parents died,? she had said. ?and don?t ask questions.?
  don?t ask questions ? that was the first rule for a quiet life with the dursleys.
  uncle vernon entered the kitchen as harry was turning over the bacon.
?comb your hair!? he barked, by way of a morning greeting.
  about once a week, uncle vernon looked over the top of his newspaper and shouted that harry needed a haircut. harry must have had more haircuts than the rest of the boys in his class put

together, but it made no difference, his hair simply grew that way ? all over the place.
  harry was frying eggs by the time dudley arrived in the kitchen with his mother. dudley looked a lot like uncle vernon. he had a large pink face, not much neck, small, watery blue eyes, and thick blond hair that lay smoothly on his thick, fat head. aunt petunia often said that dudley looked like a baby angel ? harry often said that dudley looked like a pig in a wig.
  harry put the plates of egg and bacon on the table, which was difficult as there wasn?t much room. dudley, meanwhile, was counting his presents. his face fell.
  ?thirty-six,? he said, looking up at his mother and father. ?that?s two less than last year.?
  ?darling, you haven?t counted auntie marge?s present, see, it?s here under this big one from mommy and daddy.?
  ?all right, thirty-seven then,? said dudley, going red in the face. harry, who could see a huge dudley tantrum coming on, began wolfing down his bacon as fast as possible in case dudley turned the table over.
  aunt petunia obviously scented danger, too, because she said quickly, ?and we?ll buy you another two presents while we?re out today. how?s that, popkin? two more presents. is that all right??
  dudley thought for a moment. it looked like hard work. finally he said slowly, ?so i?ll have thirty . . . thirty . . .?
?thirty-nine, sweetums,? said aunt petunia.
  ?oh.? dudley sat down heavily and grabbed the nearest parcel. ?all right then.?
uncle vernon chuckled.

  ?little tyke wants his money?s worth, just like his father. ?atta boy, dudley!? he ruffled dudley?s hair.
  at that moment the telephone rang and aunt petunia went to answer it while harry and uncle vernon watched dudley unwrap the racing bike, a video camera, a remote control airplane, sixteen new computer games, and a vcr. he was ripping the paper off a gold wristwatch when aunt petunia came back from the telephone looking both angry and worried.
  ?bad news, vernon,? she said. ?mrs. figg?s broken her leg. she can?t take him.? she jerked her head in harry?s direction.
  dudley?s mouth fell open in horror, but harry?s heart gave a leap. every year on dudley?s birthday, his parents took him and a friend out for the day, to adventure parks, hamburger restaurants, or the movies. every year, harry was left behind with mrs. figg, a mad old lady who lived two streets away. harry hated it there. the whole house smelled of cabbage and mrs. figg made him look at photographs of all the cats she?d ever owned.
  ?now what?? said aunt petunia, looking furiously at harry as though he?d planned this. harry knew he ought to feel sorry that mrs. figg had broken her leg, but it wasn?t easy when he reminded himself it would be a whole year before he had to look at tibbies, snowy, mr. paws, and tufty again.
?we could phone marge,? uncle vernon suggested.
?don?t be silly, vernon, she hates the boy.?
  the dursleys often spoke about harry like this, as though he wasn?t there ? or rather, as though he was something very nasty that couldn?t understand them, like a slug.
?what about what?s-her-name, your friend ? yvonne??

?on vacation in majorca,? snapped aunt petunia.
  ?you could just leave me here,? harry put in hopefully (he?d be able to watch what he wanted on television for a change and maybe even have a go on dudley?s computer).
aunt petunia looked as though she?d just swallowed a lemon. ?and come back and find the house in ruins?? she snarled.
?i won?t blow up the house,? said harry, but they weren?t listen
ing.
  ?i suppose we could take him to the zoo,? said aunt petunia slowly, ?. . . and leave him in the car. . . .?
?that cars new, he?s not sitting in it alone. . . .?
  dudley began to cry loudly. in fact, he wasn?t really crying ? it had been years since he?d really cried ? but he knew that if he screwed up his face and wailed, his mother would give him any-thing he wanted.
  ?dinky duddydums, don?t cry, mummy won?t let him spoil your special day!? she cried, flinging her arms around him.
  ?i . . . don?t . . . want . . . him . . . t-t-to come!? dudley yelled between huge, pretend sobs. ?he always sp-spoils everything!? he shot harry a nasty grin through the gap in his mothers arms.
  just then, the doorbell rang ? ?oh, good lord, they?re here!? said aunt petunia frantically ? and a moment later, dudley?s best friend, piers polkiss, walked in with his mother. piers was a scrawny boy with a face like a rat. he was usually the one who held people?s arms behind their backs while dudley hit them. dudley stopped pretending to cry at once.
half an hour later, harry, who couldn?t believe his luck, was sitting in the back of the dursleys? car with piers and dudley, on the

way to the zoo for the first time in his life. his aunt and uncle hadn?t been able to think of anything else to do with him, but be-fore they?d left, uncle vernon had taken harry aside.
  ?i?m warning you,? he had said, putting his large purple face right up close to harry?s, ?i?m warning you now, boy ? any funny business, anything at all ? and you?ll be in that cupboard from now until christmas.?
i?m not going to do anything,? said harry, ?honestly . . .?
but uncle vernon didn?t believe him. no one ever did.
  the problem was, strange things often happened around harry and it was just no good telling the dursleys he didn?t make them happen.
  once, aunt petunia, tired of harry coming back from the barbers looking as though he hadn?t been at all, had taken a pair of kitchen scissors and cut his hair so short he was almost bald except for his bangs, which she left ?to hide that horrible scar.? dudley had laughed himself silly at harry, who spent a sleepless night imagining school the next day, where he was already laughed at for his baggy clothes and taped glasses. next morning, however, he had gotten up to find his hair exactly as it had been before aunt petunia had sheared it off. he had been given a week in his cupboard for this, even though he had tried to explain that he couldn?t explain how it had grown back so quickly.
  another time, aunt petunia had been trying to force him into a revolting old sweater of dudley?s (brown with orange puff balls). the harder she tried to pull it over his head, the smaller it seemed to become, until finally it might have fitted a hand puppet, but certainly wouldn?t fit harry. aunt petunia had decided it must

have shrunk in the wash and, to his great relief, harry wasn?t punished.
  on the other hand, he?d gotten into terrible trouble for being found on the roof of the school kitchens. dudley?s gang had been chasing him as usual when, as much to harry?s surprise as anyone else?s, there he was sitting on the chimney. the dursleys had received a very angry letter from harry?s headmistress telling them harry had been climbing school buildings. but all he?d tried to do (as he shouted at uncle vernon through the locked door of his cup-board) was jump behind the big trash cans outside the kitchen doors. harry supposed that the wind must have caught him in mid-jump.
  but today, nothing was going to go wrong. it was even worth being with dudley and piers to be spending the day somewhere that wasn?t school, his cupboard, or mrs. figg?s cabbage-smelling living room.
  while he drove, uncle vernon complained to aunt petunia. he liked to complain about things: people at work, harry, the council, harry, the bank, and harry were just a few of his favorite subjects. this morning, it was motorcycles.
  ?. . . roaring along like maniacs, the young hoodlums,? he said, as a motorcycle overtook them.
  ?i had a dream about a motorcycle,? said harry, remembering suddenly. ?it was flying.?
  uncle vernon nearly crashed into the car in front. he turned right around in his seat and yelled at harry, his face like a gigantic beet with a mustache: ?motorcycles don?t fly!?
dudley and piers sniggered.

?i know they don?t,? said harry. ?it was only a dream.?
  but he wished he hadn?t said anything. if there was one thing the dursleys hated even more than his asking questions, it was his talking about anything acting in a way it shouldn?t, no matter if it was in a dream or even a cartoon ? they seemed to think he might get dangerous ideas.
  it was a very sunny saturday and the zoo was crowded with families. the dursleys bought dudley and piers large chocolate ice creams at the entrance and then, because the smiling lady in the van had asked harry what he wanted before they could hurry him away, they bought him a cheap lemon ice pop. it wasn?t bad, either, harry thought, licking it as they watched a gorilla scratching its head who looked remarkably like dudley, except that it wasn?t blond.
  harry had the best morning he?d had in a long time. he was careful to walk a little way apart from the dursleys so that dudley and piers, who were starting to get bored with the animals by lunchtime, wouldn?t fall back on their favorite hobby of hitting him. they ate in the zoo restaurant, and when dudley had a tantrum because his knickerbocker glory didn?t have enough ice cream on top, uncle vernon bought him another one and harry was allowed to finish the first.
  harry felt, afterward, that he should have known it was all too good to last.
  after lunch they went to the reptile house. it was cool and dark in there, with lit windows all along the walls. behind the glass, all sorts of lizards and snakes were crawling and slithering over bits of wood and stone. dudley and piers wanted to see huge, poisonous

cobras and thick, man-crushing pythons. dudley quickly found the largest snake in the place. it could have wrapped its body twice around uncle vernon?s car and crushed it into a trash can ? but at the moment it didn?t look in the mood. in fact, it was fast asleep.
  dudley stood with his nose pressed against the glass, staring at the glistening brown coils.
  ?make it move,? he whined at his father. uncle vernon tapped on the glass, but the snake didn?t budge.
 ?do it again,? dudley ordered. uncle vernon rapped the glass smartly with his knuckles, but the snake just snoozed on. ?this is boring,? dudley moaned. he shuffled away.
  harry moved in front of the tank and looked intently at the snake. he wouldn?t have been surprised if it had died of boredom itself ? no company except stupid people drumming their fingers on the glass trying to disturb it all day long. it was worse than having a cupboard as a bedroom, where the only visitor was aunt petunia hammering on the door to wake you up; at least he got to visit the rest of the house.
  the snake suddenly opened its beady eyes. slowly, very slowly, it raised its head until its eyes were on a level with harry?s. it winked.
  harry stared. then he looked quickly around to see if anyone was watching. they weren?t. he looked back at the snake and winked, too.
  the snake jerked its head toward uncle vernon and dudley, then raised its eyes to the ceiling. it gave harry a look that said quite plainly:
?i get that al the time.?

 ?i know,? harry murmured through the glass, though he wasn?t sure the snake could hear him. ?it must be really annoying.? the snake nodded vigorously.
?where do you come from, anyway?? harry asked.
  the snake jabbed its tail at a little sign next to the glass. harry peered at it.
boa constrictor, brazil.
?was it nice there??
  the boa constrictor jabbed its tail at the sign again and harry read on: this specimen was bred in the zoo. ?oh, i see ? so you?ve never been to brazil??
  as the snake shook its head, a deafening shout behind harry made both of them jump. ?dudley! mr. dursley! come and look at this snake! you won?t believe what it?s doing!?
dudley came waddling toward them as fast as he could.
  ?out of the way, you,? he said, punching harry in the ribs. caught by surprise, harry fell hard on the concrete floor. what came next happened so fast no one saw how it happened ? one second, piers and dudley were leaning right up close to the glass, the next, they had leapt back with howls of horror.
  harry sat up and gasped; the glass front of the boa constrictor?s tank had vanished. the great snake was uncoiling itself rapidly, slithering out onto the floor. people throughout the reptile house screamed and started running for the exits.
 as the snake slid swiftly past him, harry could have sworn a low, hissing voice said, ?brazil, here i come. . . . thanksss, amigo.? the keeper of the reptile house was in shock.

?but the glass,? he kept saying, ?where did the glass go??
  the zoo director himself made aunt petunia a cup of strong, sweet tea while he apologized over and over again. piers and dud-ley could only gibber. as far as harry had seen, the snake hadn?t done anything except snap playfully at their heels as it passed, but by the time they were all back in uncle vernon?s car, dudley was telling them how it had nearly bitten off his leg, while piers was swearing it had tried to squeeze him to death. but worst of all, for harry at least, was piers calming down enough to say, ?harry was talking to it, weren?t you, harry??
  uncle vernon waited until piers was safely out of the house be-fore starting on harry. he was so angry he could hardly speak. he managed to say, ?go ? cupboard ? stay ? no meals,? before he collapsed into a chair, and aunt petunia had to run and get him a large brandy.
harry lay in his dark cupboard much later, wishing he had a watch. he didn?t know what time it was and he couldn?t be sure the dursleys were asleep yet. until they were, he couldn?t risk sneaking to the kitchen for some food.
  he?d lived with the dursleys almost ten years, ten miserable years, as long as he could remember, ever since he?d been a baby and his parents had died in that car crash. he couldn?t remember being in the car when his parents had died. sometimes, when he strained his memory during long hours in his cupboard, he came up with a strange vision: a blinding flash of green light and a burning pain on his forehead. this, he supposed, was the crash, though he couldn?t imagine where all the green light came from. he

couldn?t remember his parents at all. his aunt and uncle never spoke about them, and of course he was forbidden to ask questions. there were no photographs of them in the house.
  when he had been younger, harry had dreamed and dreamed of some unknown relation coming to take him away, but it had never happened; the dursleys were his only family. yet sometimes he thought (or maybe hoped) that strangers in the street seemed to know him. very strange strangers they were, too. a tiny man in a violet top hat had bowed to him once while out shopping with aunt petunia and dudley. after asking harry furiously if he knew the man, aunt petunia had rushed them out of the shop without buying anything. a wild-looking old woman dressed all in green had waved merrily at him once on a bus. a bald man in a very long purple coat had actually shaken his hand in the street the other day and then walked away without a word. the weirdest thing about all these people was the way they seemed to vanish the second harry tried to get a closer look.
  at school, harry had no one. everybody knew that dudley?s gang hated that odd harry potter in his baggy old clothes and broken glasses, and nobody liked to disagree with dudley?s gang.

c h a p t e r t h r e e

the letters
from no one
t
 he escape of the brazilian boa constrictor earned harry his longest-ever punishment. by the time he was allowed out of his cupboard again, the summer holidays had started and dudley had already broken his new video camera, crashed his remote control airplane, and, first time out on his racing bike, knocked down old mrs. figg as she crossed privet drive on her crutches.
  harry was glad school was over, but there was no escaping dudley?s gang, who visited the house every single day. piers, dennis, malcolm, and gordon were all big and stupid, but as dudley was the biggest and stupidest of the lot, he was the leader. the rest of them were all quite happy to join in dudley?s favorite sport: harry hunting.
  this was why harry spent as much time as possible out of the house, wandering around and thinking about the end of the holidays, where he could see a tiny ray of hope. when september came he would be going off to secondary school and, for the first time in

his life, he wouldn?t be with dudley. dudley had been accepted at uncle vernon?s old private school, smeltings. piers polkiss was going there too. harry, on the other hand, was going to stonewall high, the local public school. dudley thought this was very funny.
?they stuff people?s heads down the toilet the first day at stonewall,? he told harry. ?want to come upstairs and practice??
  ?no, thanks,? said harry. ?the poor toilet?s never had anything as horrible as your head down it ? it might be sick.? then he ran, before dudley could work out what he?d said.
  one day in july, aunt petunia took dudley to london to buy his smeltings uniform, leaving harry at mrs. figg?s. mrs. figg wasn?t as bad as usual. it turned out she?d broken her leg tripping over one of her cats, and she didn?t seem quite as fond of them as before. she let harry watch television and gave him a bit of chocolate cake that tasted as though she?d had it for several years.
  that evening, dudley paraded around the living room for the family in his brand-new uniform. smeltings boys wore maroon tailcoats, orange knickerbockers, and flat straw hats called boaters. they also carried knobbly sticks, used for hitting each other while the teachers weren?t looking. this was supposed to be good training for later life.
  as he looked at dudley in his new knickerbockers, uncle vernon said gruffly that it was the proudest moment of his life. aunt petunia burst into tears and said she couldn?t believe it was her ickle dudleykins, he looked so handsome and grown-up. harry didn?t trust himself to speak. he thought two of his ribs might already have cracked from trying not to laugh.
~ ~ ~

there was a horrible smell in the kitchen the next morning when harry went in for breakfast. it seemed to be coming from a large metal tub in the sink. he went to have a look. the tub was full of what looked like dirty rags swimming in gray water.
  ?what?s this?? he asked aunt petunia. her lips tightened as they always did if he dared to ask a question.
?your new school uniform,? she said.
harry looked in the bowl again.
?oh,? he said, ?i didn?t realize it had to be so wet.?
  ?don?t be stupid,? snapped aunt petunia. ?i?m dyeing some of dudley?s old things gray for you. it?ll look just like everyone else?s when i?ve finished.?
  harry seriously doubted this, but thought it best not to argue. he sat down at the table and tried not to think about how he was going to look on his first day at stonewall high ? like he was wearing bits of old elephant skin, probably.
  dudley and uncle vernon came in, both with wrinkled noses because of the smell from harry?s new uniform. uncle vernon opened his newspaper as usual and dudley banged his smelting stick, which he carried everywhere, on the table.
  they heard the click of the mail slot and flop of letters on the doormat.
  ?get the mail, dudley,? said uncle vernon from behind his pa-per.
?make harry get it.?
?get the mail, harry.?
?make dudley get it.?
?poke him with your smelting stick, dudley.?

  harry dodged the smelting stick and went to get the mail. three things lay on the doormat: a postcard from uncle vernon?s sister marge, who was vacationing on the isle of wight, a brown envelope that looked like a bill, and ? a letter for harry.
  harry picked it up and stared at it, his heart twanging like a giant elastic band. no one, ever, in his whole life, had written to him. who would? he had no friends, no other relatives ? he didn?t be-long to the library, so he?d never even got rude notes asking for books back. yet here it was, a letter, addressed so plainly there could be no mistake:
mr. h. potter
the cupboard under the stairs 4 privet drive
little whinging
surrey
the envelope was thick and heavy, made of yellowish parchment, and the address was written in emerald-green ink. there was no stamp.
  turning the envelope over, his hand trembling, harry saw a purple wax seal bearing a coat of arms; a lion, an eagle, a badger, and a snake surrounding a large letter h.
  ?hurry up, boy!? shouted uncle vernon from the kitchen. ?what are you doing, checking for letter bombs?? he chuckled at his own joke.
  harry went back to the kitchen, still staring at his letter. he handed uncle vernon the bill and the postcard, sat down, and slowly began to open the yellow envelope.

  uncle vernon ripped open the bill, snorted in disgust, and flipped over the postcard.
  ?marge?s ill,? he informed aunt petunia. ?ate a funny whelk . . .?
?dad!? said dudley suddenly. ?dad, harry?s got something!?
  harry was on the point of unfolding his letter, which was writ-ten on the same heavy parchment as the envelope, when it was jerked sharply out of his hand by uncle vernon.
?that?s mine!? said harry, trying to snatch it back.
  ?who?d be writing to you?? sneered uncle vernon, shaking the letter open with one hand and glancing at it. his face went from red to green faster than a set of traffic lights. and it didn?t stop there. within seconds it was the grayish white of old porridge.
?p-p-petunia!? he gasped.
  dudley tried to grab the letter to read it, but uncle vernon held it high out of his reach. aunt petunia took it curiously and read the first line. for a moment it looked as though she might faint. she clutched her throat and made a choking noise.
?vernon! oh my goodness ? vernon!?
  they stared at each other, seeming to have forgotten that harry and dudley were still in the room. dudley wasn?t used to being ignored. he gave his father a sharp tap on the head with his smelting stick.
?i want to read that letter,? he said loudly.
?i want to read it,? said harry furiously, ?as it?s mine.?
  ?get out, both of you,? croaked uncle vernon, stuffing the let-ter back inside its envelope.
harry didn?t move.
?i want my letter!? he shouted.

?let me see it!? demanded dudley.
  ?out!? roared uncle vernon, and he took both harry and dudley by the scruffs of their necks and threw them into the hall, slamming the kitchen door behind them. harry and dudley promptly had a furious but silent fight over who would listen at the keyhole; dudley won, so harry, his glasses dangling from one ear, lay flat on his stomach to listen at the crack between door and floor.
  ?vernon,? aunt petunia was saying in a quivering voice, ?look at the address ? how could they possibly know where he sleeps? you don?t think they?re watching the house??
  ?watching ? spying ? might be following us,? muttered uncle vernon wildly.
  ?but what should we do, vernon? should we write back? tell them we don?t want ??
  harry could see uncle vernon?s shiny black shoes pacing up and down the kitchen.
 ?no,? he said finally. ?no, we?ll ignore it. if they don?t get an answer. . . . yes, that?s best . . . we won?t do anything. . . .? ?but ??
  ?i?m not having one in the house, petunia! didn?t we swear when we took him in we?d stamp out that dangerous nonsense??
that evening when he got back from work, uncle vernon did something he?d never done before; he visited harry in his cup-board.
  ?where?s my letter?? said harry, the moment uncle vernon had squeezed through the door. ?who?s writing to me??

  ?no one. it was addressed to you by mistake,? said uncle vernon shortly. ?i have burned it.?
  ?it was not a mistake,? said harry angrily, ?it had my cupboard on it.?
  ?silence!? yelled uncle vernon, and a couple of spiders fell from the ceiling. he took a few deep breaths and then forced his face into a smile, which looked quite painful.
  ?er ? yes, harry ? about this cupboard. your aunt and i have been thinking . . . you?re really getting a bit big for it . . . we think it might be nice if you moved into dudley?s second bed-room.?
?why?? said harry.
  ?don?t ask questions!? snapped his uncle. ?take this stuff up-stairs, now.?
  the dursleys? house had four bedrooms: one for uncle vernon and aunt petunia, one for visitors (usually uncle vernon?s sister, marge), one where dudley slept, and one where dudley kept all the toys and things that wouldn?t fit into his first bedroom. it only took harry one trip upstairs to move everything he owned from the cupboard to this room. he sat down on the bed and stared around him. nearly everything in here was broken. the month-old video camera was lying on top of a small, working tank dudley had once driven over the next door neighbor?s dog; in the corner was dudley?s first-ever television set, which he?d put his foot through when his favorite program had been canceled; there was a large birdcage, which had once held a parrot that dudley had swapped at school for a real air rifle, which was up on a shelf with the end all bent because dudley had sat on it. other shelves were full of

books. they were the only things in the room that looked as though they?d never been touched.
  from downstairs came the sound of dudley bawling at his mother, ?i don?t want him in there . . . i need that room . . . make him get out. . . .?
  harry sighed and stretched out on the bed. yesterday he?d have given anything to be up here. today he?d rather be back in his cup-board with that letter than up here without it.
next morning at breakfast, everyone was rather quiet. dudley was in shock. he?d screamed, whacked his father with his smelting stick, been sick on purpose, kicked his mother, and thrown his tortoise through the greenhouse roof, and he still didn?t have his room back. harry was thinking about this time yesterday and bitterly wishing he?d opened the letter in the hall. uncle vernon and aunt petunia kept looking at each other darkly.
  when the mail arrived, uncle vernon, who seemed to be trying to be nice to harry, made dudley go and get it. they heard him banging things with his smelting stick all the way down the hall. then he shouted, ?there?s another one! ?mr. h. potter, the smallest bedroom, 4 privet drive ?? ?
  with a strangled cry, uncle vernon leapt from his seat and ran down the hall, harry right behind him. uncle vernon had to wrestle dudley to the ground to get the letter from him, which was made difficult by the fact that harry had grabbed uncle vernon around the neck from behind. after a minute of confused fighting, in which everyone got hit a lot by the smelting stick, uncle vernon straightened up, gasping for breath, with harry?s letter clutched in his hand.

  ?go to your cupboard ? i mean, your bedroom,? he wheezed at harry. ?dudley ? go ? just go.?
  harry walked round and round his new room. someone knew he had moved out of his cupboard and they seemed to know he hadn?t received his first letter. surely that meant they?d try again? and this time he?d make sure they didn?t fail. he had a plan.
the repaired alarm clock rang at six o?clock the next morning. harry turned it off quickly and dressed silently he mustn?t wake the dursleys. he stole downstairs without turning on any of the lights.
  he was going to wait for the postman on the corner of privet drive and get the letters for number four first. his heart hammered as he crept across the dark hall toward the front door ?
?aaaaarrrgh!?
  harry leapt into the air; he?d trodden on something big and squashy on the doormat ? something alive!
  lights clicked on upstairs and to his horror harry realized that the big, squashy something had been his uncle?s face. uncle vernon had been lying at the foot of the front door in a sleeping bag, clearly making sure that harry didn?t do exactly what he?d been trying to do. he shouted at harry for about half an hour and then told him to go and make a cup of tea. harry shuffled miserably off into the kitchen and by the time he got back, the mail had arrived, right into uncle vernon?s lap. harry could see three letters ad-dressed in green ink.
  ?i want ?? he began, but uncle vernon was tearing the letters into pieces before his eyes.

  uncle vernon didn?t go to work that day. he stayed at home and nailed up the mail slot.
  ?see,? he explained to aunt petunia through a mouthful of nails, ?if they can?t deliver them they?ll just give up.?
?i?m not sure that?ll work, vernon.?
  ?oh, these peoples minds work in strange ways, petunia, they?re not like you and me,? said uncle vernon, trying to knock in a nail with the piece of fruitcake aunt petunia had just brought him.
on friday, no less than twelve letters arrived for harry. as they couldn?t go through the mail slot they had been pushed under the door, slotted through the sides, and a few even forced through the small window in the downstairs bathroom.
  uncle vernon stayed at home again. after burning all the letters, he got out a hammer and nails and boarded up the cracks around the front and back doors so no one could go out. he hummed ?tiptoe through the tulips? as he worked, and jumped at small noises.
on saturday, things began to get out of hand. twenty-four letters to harry found their way into the house, rolled up and hidden in-side each of the two dozen eggs that their very confused milkman had handed aunt petunia through the living room window. while uncle vernon made furious telephone calls to the post office and the dairy trying to find someone to complain to, aunt petunia shredded the letters in her food processor.
  ?who on earth wants to talk to you this badly?? dudley asked harry in amazement.

on sunday morning, uncle vernon sat down at the breakfast table looking tired and rather ill, but happy.
?no post on sundays,? he reminded them cheerfully as he spread marmalade on his newspapers, ?no damn letters today ??
  something came whizzing down the kitchen chimney as he spoke and caught him sharply on the back of the head. next moment, thirty or forty letters came pelting out of the fireplace like bullets. the dursleys ducked, but harry leapt into the air trying to catch one ?
?out! out!?
  uncle vernon seized harry around the waist and threw him into the hall. when aunt petunia and dudley had run out with their arms over their faces, uncle vernon slammed the door shut. they could hear the letters still streaming into the room, bouncing off the walls and floor.
  ?that does it,? said uncle vernon, trying to speak calmly but pulling great tufts out of his mustache at the same time. ?i want you all back here in five minutes ready to leave. we?re going away. just pack some clothes. no arguments!?
  he looked so dangerous with half his mustache missing that no one dared argue. ten minutes later they had wrenched their way through the boarded-up doors and were in the car, speeding toward the highway. dudley was sniffling in the back seat; his father had hit him round the head for holding them up while he tried to pack his television, vcr, and computer in his sports bag.
  they drove. and they drove. even aunt petunia didn?t dare ask where they were going. every now and then uncle vernon would take a sharp turn and drive in the opposite direction for a while.

  ?shake ?em off . . . shake ?em off,? he would mutter whenever he did this.
  they didn?t stop to eat or drink all day. by nightfall dudley was howling. he?d never had such a bad day in his life. he was hungry, he?d missed five television programs he?d wanted to see, and he?d never gone so long without blowing up an alien on his computer.
  uncle vernon stopped at last outside a gloomy-looking hotel on the outskirts of a big city. dudley and harry shared a room with twin beds and damp, musty sheets. dudley snored but harry stayed awake, sitting on the windowsill, staring down at the lights of passing cars and wondering. . . .
they ate stale cornflakes and cold tinned tomatoes on toast for breakfast the next day. they had just finished when the owner of the hotel came over to their table.
  ? ?scuse me, but is one of you mr. h. potter? only i got about an ?undred of these at the front desk.?
she held up a letter so they could read the green ink address:
mr. h. potter room 17
railview hotel cokeworth
  harry made a grab for the letter but uncle vernon knocked his hand out of the way. the woman stared.
  ?i?ll take them,? said uncle vernon, standing up quickly and following her from the dining room.
~ ~ ~

  ?wouldn?t it be better just to go home, dear?? aunt petunia suggested timidly, hours later, but uncle vernon didn?t seem to hear her. exactly what he was looking for, none of them knew. he drove them into the middle of a forest, got out, looked around, shook his head, got back in the car, and off they went again. the same thing happened in the middle of a plowed field, halfway across a suspension bridge, and at the top of a multilevel parking garage.
  ?daddy?s gone mad, hasn?t he?? dudley asked aunt petunia dully late that afternoon. uncle vernon had parked at the coast, locked them all inside the car, and disappeared.
  it started to rain. great drops beat on the roof of the car. dud-ley sniveled.
  ?it?s monday,? he told his mother. ?the great humberto?s on tonight. i want to stay somewhere with a television.?
  monday. this reminded harry of something. if it was mon-day ? and you could usually count on dudley to know the days of the week, because of television ? then tomorrow, tuesday, was harry?s eleventh birthday. of course, his birthdays were never exactly fun ? last year, the dursleys had given him a coat hanger and a pair of uncle vernon?s old socks. still, you weren?t eleven every day.
  uncle vernon was back and he was smiling. he was also carrying a long, thin package and didn?t answer aunt petunia when she asked what he?d bought.
  ?found the perfect place!? he said. ?come on! everyone out!?
it was very cold outside the car. uncle vernon was pointing at what looked like a large rock way out at sea. perched on top of the

rock was the most miserable little shack you could imagine. one thing was certain, there was no television in there.
  ?storm forecast for tonight!? said uncle vernon gleefully, clap-ping his hands together. ?and this gentleman?s kindly agreed to lend us his boat!?
  a toothless old man came ambling up to them, pointing, with a rather wicked grin, at an old rowboat bobbing in the iron-gray water below them.
  ?i?ve already got us some rations,? said uncle vernon, ?so all aboard!?
  it was freezing in the boat. icy sea spray and rain crept down their necks and a chilly wind whipped their faces. after what seemed like hours they reached the rock, where uncle vernon, slip-ping and sliding, led the way to the broken-down house.
  the inside was horrible; it smelled strongly of seaweed, the wind whistled through the gaps in the wooden walls, and the fireplace was damp and empty. there were only two rooms.
  uncle vernon?s rations turned out to be a bag of chips each and four bananas. he tried to start a fire but the empty chip bags just smoked and shriveled up.
  ?could do with some of those letters now, eh?? he said cheer-fully.
  he was in a very good mood. obviously he thought nobody stood a chance of reaching them here in a storm to deliver mail. harry privately agreed, though the thought didn?t cheer him up at all.
as night fell, the promised storm blew up around them. spray from the high waves splattered the walls of the hut and a fierce

wind rattled the filthy windows. aunt petunia found a few moldy blankets in the second room and made up a bed for dudley on the moth-eaten sofa. she and uncle vernon went off to the lumpy bed next door, and harry was left to find the softest bit of floor he could and to curl up under the thinnest, most ragged blanket.
  the storm raged more and more ferociously as the night went on. harry couldn?t sleep. he shivered and turned over, trying to get comfortable, his stomach rumbling with hunger. dudley?s snores were drowned by the low rolls of thunder that started near mid-night. the lighted dial of dudley?s watch, which was dangling over the edge of the sofa on his fat wrist, told harry he?d be eleven in ten minutes? time. he lay and watched his birthday tick nearer, wondering if the dursleys would remember at all, wondering where the letter writer was now.
  five minutes to go. harry heard something creak outside. he hoped the roof wasn?t going to fall in, although he might be warmer if it did. four minutes to go. maybe the house in privet drive would be so full of letters when they got back that he?d be able to steal one somehow.
  three minutes to go. was that the sea, slapping hard on the rock like that? and (two minutes to go) what was that funny crunching noise? was the rock crumbling into the sea?
  one minute to go and he?d be eleven. thirty seconds . . . twenty . . . ten . . . nine ? maybe he?d wake dudley up, just to annoy him ? three . . . two . . . one . . .
boom.
  the whole shack shivered and harry sat bolt upright, staring at the door. someone was outside, knocking to come in.


the keeper of the keys
b
 oom. they knocked again. dudley jerked awake. ?where?s the cannon?? he said stupidly. there was a crash behind them and uncle vernon came skid-ding into the room. he was holding a rifle in his hands ? now they knew what had been in the long, thin package he had brought with them.
?who?s there?? he shouted. ?i warn you ? i?m armed!? there was a pause. then ?
smash!
  the door was hit with such force that it swung clean off its hinges and with a deafening crash landed flat on the floor.
  a giant of a man was standing in the doorway. his face was al-most completely hidden by a long, shaggy mane of hair and a wild, tangled beard, but you could make out his eyes, glinting like black beetles under all the hair.

  the giant squeezed his way into the hut, stooping so that his head just brushed the ceiling. he bent down, picked up the door, and fitted it easily back into its frame. the noise of the storm out-side dropped a little. he turned to look at them all.
  ?couldn?t make us a cup o? tea, could yeh? it?s not been an easy journey. . . .?
he strode over to the sofa where dudley sat frozen with fear. ?budge up, yeh great lump,? said the stranger.
  dudley squeaked and ran to hide behind his mother, who was crouching, terrified, behind uncle vernon.
?an? here?s harry!? said the giant.
  harry looked up into the fierce, wild, shadowy face and saw that the beetle eyes were crinkled in a smile.
  ?las? time i saw you, you was only a baby,? said the giant. ?yeh look a lot like yer dad, but yeh?ve got yer mom?s eyes.?
uncle vernon made a funny rasping noise.
  ?i demand that you leave at once, sir!? he said. ?you are breaking and entering!?
  ?ah, shut up, dursley, yeh great prune,? said the giant; he reached over the back of the sofa, jerked the gun out of uncle vernon?s hands, bent it into a knot as easily as if it had been made of rubber, and threw it into a corner of the room.
  uncle vernon made another funny noise, like a mouse being trodden on.
?anyway ? harry,? said the giant, turning his back on the
dursleys, ?a very happy birthday to yeh. got summat fer yeh
here ? i mighta sat on it at some point, but it?ll taste all right.?
from an inside pocket of his black overcoat he pulled a slightly

squashed box. harry opened it with trembling fingers. inside was a large, sticky chocolate cake with happy birthday harry written on it in green icing.
  harry looked up at the giant. he meant to say thank you, but the words got lost on the way to his mouth, and what he said in-stead was, ?who are you??
the giant chuckled.
  ?true, i haven?t introduced meself. rubeus hagrid, keeper of keys and grounds at hogwarts.?
he held out an enormous hand and shook harry?s whole arm.
?what about that tea then, eh?? he said, rubbing his hands together. ?i?d not say no ter summat stronger if yeh?ve got it, mind.?
  his eyes fell on the empty grate with the shriveled chip bags in it and he snorted. he bent down over the fireplace; they couldn?t see what he was doing but when he drew back a second later, there was a roaring fire there. it filled the whole damp hut with flickering light and harry felt the warmth wash over him as though he?d sunk into a hot bath.
  the giant sat back down on the sofa, which sagged under his weight, and began taking all sorts of things out of the pockets of his coat: a copper kettle, a squashy package of sausages, a poker, a teapot, several chipped mugs, and a bottle of some amber liquid that he took a swig from before starting to make tea. soon the hut was full of the sound and smell of sizzling sausage. nobody said a thing while the giant was working, but as he slid the first six fat, juicy, slightly burnt sausages from the poker, dudley fidgeted a little. uncle vernon said sharply, ?don?t touch anything he gives you, dudley.?
the giant chuckled darkly.

  ?yer great puddin? of a son don? need fattenin? anymore, dursley, don? worry.?
  he passed the sausages to harry, who was so hungry he had never tasted anything so wonderful, but he still couldn?t take his eyes off the giant. finally, as nobody seemed about to explain any-thing, he said, ?i?m sorry, but i still don?t really know who you are.?
  the giant took a gulp of tea and wiped his mouth with the back of his hand.
  ?call me hagrid,? he said, ?everyone does. an? like i told yeh, i?m keeper of keys at hogwarts ? yeh?ll know all about hog-warts, o? course.?
?er ? no,? said harry.
hagrid looked shocked.
?sorry,? harry said quickly.
  ?sorry?? barked hagrid, turning to stare at the dursleys, who shrank back into the shadows. ?it?s them as should be sorry! i knew yeh weren?t gettin? yer letters but i never thought yeh wouldn?t even know abou? hogwarts, fer cryin? out loud! did yeh never wonder where yer parents learned it all??
?all what?? asked harry.
 ?all what?? hagrid thundered. ?now wait jus? one second!? he had leapt to his feet. in his anger he seemed to fill the whole hut. the dursleys were cowering against the wall.
?do you mean ter tell me,? he growled at the dursleys, ?that this boy ? this boy! ? knows nothin? abou? ? about anything??
  harry thought this was going a bit far. he had been to school, after all, and his marks weren?t bad.
  ?i know some things,? he said. ?i can, you know, do math and stuff.?

  but hagrid simply waved his hand and said, ?about our world, i mean. your world. my world. yer parents? world.?
?what world??
hagrid looked as if he was about to explode.
?dursley!? he boomed.
uncle vernon, who had gone very pale, whispered something that sounded like ?mimblewimble.? hagrid stared wildly at harry.
  ?but yeh must know about yer mom and dad,? he said. ?i mean, they?re famous. you?re famous.?
 ?what? my ? my mom and dad weren?t famous, were they?? ?yeh don? know . . . yeh don? know . . .? hagrid ran his fingers through his hair, fixing harry with a bewildered stare.
?yeh don? know what yeh are?? he said finally.
uncle vernon suddenly found his voice.
  ?stop!? he commanded. ?stop right there, sir! i forbid you to tell the boy anything!?
  a braver man than vernon dursley would have quailed under the furious look hagrid now gave him; when hagrid spoke, his every syllable trembled with rage.
  ?you never told him? never told him what was in the letter dumbledore left fer him? i was there! i saw dumbledore leave it, dursley! an? you?ve kept it from him all these years??
?kept what from me?? said harry eagerly.
?stop! i forbid you!? yelled uncle vernon in panic. aunt petunia gave a gasp of horror.
  ?ah, go boil yer heads, both of yeh,? said hagrid. ?harry ? yer a wizard.?
  there was silence inside the hut. only the sea and the whistling wind could be heard.

?i ?m a what?? gasped harry.
  ?a wizard, o? course,? said hagrid, sitting back down on the sofa, which groaned and sank even lower, ?an? a thumpin? good ?un, i?d say, once yeh?ve been trained up a bit. with a mum an? dad like yours, what else would yeh be? an? i reckon it?s abou? time yeh read yer letter.?
  harry stretched out his hand at last to take the yellowish envelope, addressed in emerald green to mr. h. potter, the floor, huton-the-rock, the sea. he pulled out the letter and read:
hogwarts school
of witchcraft and wizardry

headmaster: albus dumbledore
(order of merlin, first class, grand sorc., chf. warlock,
supreme mugwump, international confed. of wizards)
dear mr. potter,
  we are pleased to inform you that you have been accepted at hogwarts school of witchcraft and wizardry. please find enclosed a list of all necessary books and equipment.
  term begins on september 1. we await your owl by no later than july 31.
yours sincerely,

minerva mcgonagall, deputy headmistress

questions exploded inside harry?s head like fireworks and he couldn?t decide which to ask first. after a few minutes he stammered, ?what does it mean, they await my owl??
  ?gallopin? gorgons, that reminds me,? said hagrid, clapping a hand to his forehead with enough force to knock over a cart horse, and from yet another pocket inside his overcoat he pulled an owl ? a real, live, rather ruffled-looking owl ? a long quill, and a roll of parchment. with his tongue between his teeth he scribbled a note that harry could read upside down:
dear professor dumbledore,
given harry his letter.
taking him to buy his things tomorrow. weather?s horrible. hope you?re well. hagrid
  hagrid rolled up the note, gave it to the owl, which clamped it in its beak, went to the door, and threw the owl out into the storm. then he came back and sat down as though this was as normal as talking on the telephone.
harry realized his mouth was open and closed it quickly.
  ?where was i?? said hagrid, but at that moment, uncle vernon, still ashen-faced but looking very angry, moved into the fire-light.
?he?s not going,? he said.
hagrid grunted.
?i ?d like ter see a great muggle like you stop him,? he said. ?a what?? said harry, interested.

  ?a muggle,? said hagrid, ?it?s what we call nonmagic folk like them. an? it?s your bad luck you grew up in a family o? the biggest muggles i ever laid eyes on.?
  ?we swore when we took him in we?d put a stop to that rubbish,? said uncle vernon, ?swore we?d stamp it out of him! wizard indeed!?
?you knew?? said harry. ?you knew i?m a ? a wizard??
  ?knew!? shrieked aunt petunia suddenly. ?knew! of course we knew! how could you not be, my dratted sister being what she was? oh, she got a letter just like that and disappeared off to that ? that school ? and came home every vacation with her pockets full of frog spawn, turning teacups into rats. i was the only one who saw her for what she was ? a freak! but for my mother and father, oh no, it was lily this and lily that, they were proud of having a witch in the family!?
  she stopped to draw a deep breath and then went ranting on. it seemed she had been wanting to say all this for years.
  ?then she met that potter at school and they left and got married and had you, and of course i knew you?d be just the same, just as strange, just as ? as ? abnormal ? and then, if you please, she went and got herself blown up and we got landed with you!?
  harry had gone very white. as soon as he found his voice he said, ?blown up? you told me they died in a car crash!?
  ?car crash!? roared hagrid, jumping up so angrily that the dursleys scuttled back to their corner. ?how could a car crash kill lily an? james potter? it?s an outrage! a scandal! harry potter not knowin? his own story when every kid in our world knows his name!?

?but why? what happened?? harry asked urgently.
the anger faded from hagrid?s face. he looked suddenly anxious.
  ?i never expected this,? he said, in a low, worried voice. ?i had no idea, when dumbledore told me there might be trouble gettin? hold of yeh, how much yeh didn?t know. ah, harry, i don? know if i?m the right person ter tell yeh ? but someone?s gotta ? yeh can?t go off ter hogwarts not knowin?.?
he threw a dirty look at the dursleys.
  ?well, it?s best yeh know as much as i can tell yeh ? mind, i can?t tell yeh everythin?, it?s a great myst?ry, parts of it. . . .?
  he sat down, stared into the fire for a few seconds, and then said, ?it begins, i suppose, with ? with a person called ? but it?s incredible yeh don?t know his name, everyone in our world knows ??
?who??
  ?well ? i don? like sayin? the name if i can help it. no one does.?
?why not??
  ?gulpin? gargoyles, harry, people are still scared. blimey, this is difficult. see, there was this wizard who went . . . bad. as bad as you could go. worse. worse than worse. his name was . . .?
hagrid gulped, but no words came out.
?could you write it down?? harry suggested.
  ?nah ? can?t spell it. all right ? voldemort.? hagrid shuddered. ?don? make me say it again. anyway, this ? this wizard, about twenty years ago now, started lookin? fer followers. got ?em, too ? some were afraid, some just wanted a bit o? his power, ?cause he was gettin? himself power, all right. dark days, harry. didn?t

know who ter trust, didn?t dare get friendly with strange wizards or witches . . . terrible things happened. he was takin? over. ?course, some stood up to him ? an? he killed ?em. horribly. one o? the only safe places left was hogwarts. reckon dumbledore?s the only one you-know-who was afraid of. didn?t dare try takin? the school, not jus? then, anyway.
  ?now, yer mum an? dad were as good a witch an? wizard as i ever knew. head boy an? girl at hogwarts in their day! suppose the myst?ry is why you-know-who never tried to get ?em on his side be-fore . . . probably knew they were too close ter dumbledore ter want anythin? ter do with the dark side.
  ?maybe he thought he could persuade ?em . . . maybe he just wanted ?em outta the way. all anyone knows is, he turned up in the village where you was all living, on halloween ten years ago. you was just a year old. he came ter yer house an? ? an? ??
  hagrid suddenly pulled out a very dirty, spotted handkerchief and blew his nose with a sound like a foghorn.
  ?sorry,? he said. ?but it?s that sad ? knew yer mum an? dad, an? nicer people yeh couldn?t find ? anyway . . .
  ?you-know-who killed ?em. an? then ? an? this is the real myst?ry of the thing ? he tried to kill you, too. wanted ter make a clean job of it, i suppose, or maybe he just liked killin? by then. but he couldn?t do it. never wondered how you got that mark on yer forehead? that was no ordinary cut. that?s what yeh get when a powerful, evil curse touches yeh ? took care of yer mum an? dad an? yer house, even ? but it didn?t work on you, an? that?s why yer famous, harry. no one ever lived after he decided ter kill ?em, no one except you, an? he?d killed some o? the best witches an? wizards

of the age ? the mckinnons, the bones, the prewetts ? an? you was only a baby, an? you lived.?
  something very painful was going on in harry?s mind. as hagrid?s story came to a close, he saw again the blinding flash of green light, more clearly than he had ever remembered it before ? and he remembered something else, for the first time in his life: a high, cold, cruel laugh.
hagrid was watching him sadly.
  ?took yeh from the ruined house myself, on dumbledore?s orders. brought yeh ter this lot . . .?
  ?load of old tosh,? said uncle vernon. harry jumped; he had almost forgotten that the dursleys were there. uncle vernon certainly seemed to have got back his courage. he was glaring at ha-grid and his fists were clenched.
  ?now, you listen here, boy,? he snarled, ?i accept there?s some-thing strange about you, probably nothing a good beating wouldn?t have cured ? and as for all this about your parents, well, they were weirdos, no denying it, and the world?s better off without them in my opinion ? asked for all they got, getting mixed up with these wizarding types ? just what i expected, always knew they?d come to a sticky end ??
  but at that moment, hagrid leapt from the sofa and drew a battered pink umbrella from inside his coat. pointing this at uncle vernon like a sword, he said, ?i?m warning you, dursley ? i?m warning you ? one more word . . .?
  in danger of being speared on the end of an umbrella by a bearded giant, uncle vernon?s courage failed again; he flattened himself against the wall and fell silent.

?that?s better,? said hagrid, breathing heavily and sitting back
down on the sofa, which this time sagged right down to the floor. harry, meanwhile, still had questions to ask, hundreds of them. ?but what happened to vol-, sorry ? i mean, you-know
who??
  ?good question, harry. disappeared. vanished. same night he tried ter kill you. makes yeh even more famous. that?s the biggest myst?ry, see . . . he was gettin? more an? more powerful ? why?d he go?
  ?some say he died. codswallop, in my opinion. dunno if he had enough human left in him to die. some say he?s still out there, bidin? his time, like, but i don? believe it. people who was on his side came back ter ours. some of ?em came outta kinda trances. don? reckon they could?ve done if he was comin? back.
  ?most of us reckon he?s still out there somewhere but lost his powers. too weak to carry on. ?cause somethin? about you finished him, harry. there was somethin? goin? on that night he hadn?t counted on ? i dunno what it was, no one does ? but somethin? about you stumped him, all right.?
  hagrid looked at harry with warmth and respect blazing in his eyes, but harry, instead of feeling pleased and proud, felt quite sure there had been a horrible mistake. a wizard? him? how could he possibly be? he?d spent his life being clouted by dudley, and bullied by aunt petunia and uncle vernon; if he was really a wizard, why hadn?t they been turned into warty toads every time they?d tried to lock him in his cupboard? if he?d once defeated the greatest sorcerer in the world, how come dudley had always been able to kick him around like a football?

  ?hagrid,? he said quietly, ?i think you must have made a mistake. i don?t think i can be a wizard.?
to his surprise, hagrid chuckled.
  ?not a wizard, eh? never made things happen when you was scared or angry??
  harry looked into the fire. now he came to think about it . . . every odd thing that had ever made his aunt and uncle furious with him had happened when he, harry, had been upset or angry . . . chased by dudley?s gang, he had somehow found himself out of their reach . . . dreading going to school with that ridiculous hair-cut, he?d managed to make it grow back . . . and the very last time dudley had hit him, hadn?t he got his revenge, without even realizing he was doing it? hadn?t he set a boa constrictor on him?
  harry looked back at hagrid, smiling, and saw that hagrid was positively beaming at him.
  ?see?? said hagrid. ?harry potter, not a wizard ? you wait, you?ll be right famous at hogwarts.?
but uncle vernon wasn?t going to give in without a fight.
  ?haven?t i told you he?s not going?? he hissed. ?he?s going to stonewall high and he?ll be grateful for it. i?ve read those letters and he needs all sorts of rubbish ? spell books and wands and ??
  ?if he wants ter go, a great muggle like you won?t stop him,? growled hagrid. ?stop lily an? james potter?s son goin? ter hog-warts! yer mad. his name?s been down ever since he was born. he?s off ter the finest school of witchcraft and wizardry in the world. seven years there and he won?t know himself. he?ll be with youngsters of his own sort, fer a change, an? he?ll be under the greatest headmaster hogwarts ever had, albus dumbled??

  ?i am not paying for some crackpot old fool to teach him magic tricks!? yelled uncle vernon.
  but he had finally gone too far. hagrid seized his umbrella and whirled it over his head, ?never ?? he thundered, ?? insult ? albus ? dumbledore ? in ? front ? of ? me!?
  he brought the umbrella swishing down through the air to point at dudley ? there was a flash of violet light, a sound like a firecracker, a sharp squeal, and the next second, dudley was dancing on the spot with his hands clasped over his fat bottom, howling in pain. when he turned his back on them, harry saw a curly pig?s tail poking through a hole in his trousers.
  uncle vernon roared. pulling aunt petunia and dudley into the other room, he cast one last terrified look at hagrid and slammed the door behind them.
hagrid looked down at his umbrella and stroked his beard.
  ?shouldn?ta lost me temper,? he said ruefully, ?but it didn?t work anyway. meant ter turn him into a pig, but i suppose he was so much like a pig anyway there wasn?t much left ter do.?
he cast a sideways look at harry under his bushy eyebrows.
  ?be grateful if yeh didn?t mention that ter anyone at hogwarts,? he said. ?i?m ? er ? not supposed ter do magic, strictly speakin?. i was allowed ter do a bit ter follow yeh an? get yer letters to yeh an? stuff ? one o? the reasons i was so keen ter take on the job ??
?why aren?t you supposed to do magic?? asked harry.
  ?oh, well ? i was at hogwarts meself but i ? er ? got expelled, ter tell yeh the truth. in me third year. they snapped me wand in half an? everything. but dumbledore let me stay on as gamekeeper. great man, dumbledore.?

?why were you expelled??
?it?s gettin? late and we?ve got lots ter do tomorrow,? said hagrid
loudly. ?gotta get up ter town, get all yer books an? that.? he took off his thick black coat and threw it to harry.
?you can kip under that,? he said. ?don? mind if it wriggles a
bit, i think i still got a couple o? dormice in one o? the pockets.?

c h a p t e r f i v e

diagon alley
h
 arry woke early the next morning. although he could tell it was daylight, he kept his eyes shut tight. ?it was a dream,? he told himself firmly. ?i dreamed a giant called hagrid came to tell me i was going to a school for wizards. when i open my eyes i?ll be at home in my cupboard.?
there was suddenly a loud tapping noise.
  and there?s aunt petunia knocking on the door, harry thought, his heart sinking. but he still didn?t open his eyes. it had been such a good dream.
tap. tap. tap.
?all right,? harry mumbled, ?i?m getting up.?
  he sat up and hagrid?s heavy coat fell off him. the hut was full of sunlight, the storm was over, hagrid himself was asleep on the collapsed sofa, and there was an owl rapping its claw on the window, a newspaper held in its beak.

  harry scrambled to his feet, so happy he felt as though a large balloon was swelling inside him. he went straight to the window and jerked it open. the owl swooped in and dropped the newspaper on top of hagrid, who didn?t wake up. the owl then fluttered onto the floor and began to attack hagrid?s coat.
?don?t do that.?
  harry tried to wave the owl out of the way, but it snapped its beak fiercely at him and carried on savaging the coat.
?hagrid!? said harry loudly. ?there?s an owl ??
?pay him,? hagrid grunted into the sofa.
?what??
?he wants payin? fer deliverin? the paper. look in the pockets.?
  hagrid?s coat seemed to be made of nothing but pockets ? bunches of keys, slug pellets, balls of string, peppermint humbugs, teabags . . . finally, harry pulled out a handful of strange-looking coins.
?give him five knuts,? said hagrid sleepily.
?knuts??
?the little bronze ones.?
  harry counted out five little bronze coins, and the owl held out his leg so harry could put the money into a small leather pouch tied to it. then he flew off through the open window.
hagrid yawned loudly, sat up, and stretched.
  ?best be off, harry, lots ter do today, gotta get up ter london an? buy all yer stuff fer school.?
  harry was turning over the wizard coins and looking at them. he had just thought of something that made him feel as though the happy balloon inside him had got a puncture.

?um ? hagrid??
?mm?? said hagrid, who was pulling on his huge boots.
  ?i haven?t got any money ? and you heard uncle vernon last night . . . he won?t pay for me to go and learn magic.?
 ?don?t worry about that,? said hagrid, standing up and scratching his head. ?d?yeh think yer parents didn?t leave yeh anything?? ?but if their house was destroyed ??
  ?they didn? keep their gold in the house, boy! nah, first stop fer us is gringotts. wizards? bank. have a sausage, they?re not bad cold ? an? i wouldn? say no teh a bit o? yer birthday cake, neither.?
?wizards have banks??
?just the one. gringotts. run by goblins.?
harry dropped the bit of sausage he was holding.
?goblins??
  ?yeah ? so yeh?d be mad ter try an? rob it, i?ll tell yeh that. never mess with goblins, harry. gringotts is the safest place in the world fer anything yeh want ter keep safe ? ?cept maybe hog-warts. as a matter o? fact, i gotta visit gringotts anyway fer dumbledore. hogwarts business.? hagrid drew himself up proudly. ?he usually gets me ter do important stuff fer him. fetchin? you ? gettin? things from gringotts ? knows he can trust me, see.
?got everythin?? come on, then.?
  harry followed hagrid out onto the rock. the sky was quite clear now and the sea gleamed in the sunlight. the boat uncle vernon had hired was still there, with a lot of water in the bottom after the storm.
  ?how did you get here?? harry asked, looking around for an-other boat.

?flew,? said hagrid.
?flew? ?
  ?yeah ? but we?ll go back in this. not s?pposed ter use magic now i?ve got yeh.?
  they settled down in the boat, harry still staring at hagrid, trying to imagine him flying.
  ?seems a shame ter row, though,? said hagrid, giving harry an-other of his sideways looks. ?if i was ter ? er ? speed things up a bit, would yeh mind not mentionin? it at hogwarts??
  ?of course not,? said harry, eager to see more magic. hagrid pulled out the pink umbrella again, tapped it twice on the side of the boat, and they sped off toward land.
  ?why would you be mad to try and rob gringotts?? harry asked.
  ?spells ? enchantments,? said hagrid, unfolding his news-paper as he spoke. ?they say there?s dragons guardin? the high-security vaults. and then yeh gotta find yer way ? gringotts is hundreds of miles under london, see. deep under the under-ground. yeh?d die of hunger tryin? ter get out, even if yeh did man-age ter get yer hands on summat.?
  harry sat and thought about this while hagrid read his newspaper, the daily prophet. harry had learned from uncle vernon that people liked to be left alone while they did this, but it was very difficult, he?d never had so many questions in his life.
  ?ministry o? magic messin? things up as usual,? hagrid muttered, turning the page.
  ?there?s a ministry of magic?? harry asked, before he could stop himself.
? ?course,? said hagrid. ?they wanted dumbledore fer minis

ter, o? course, but he?d never leave hogwarts, so old cornelius fudge got the job. bungler if ever there was one. so he pelts dumbledore with owls every morning, askin? fer advice.?
?but what does a ministry of magic do??
  ?well, their main job is to keep it from the muggles that there?s still witches an? wizards up an? down the country.?
?why??
  ?why? blimey, harry, everyone?d be wantin? magic solutions to their problems. nah, we?re best left alone.?
  at this moment the boat bumped gently into the harbor wall. hagrid folded up his newspaper, and they clambered up the stone steps onto the street.
  passersby stared a lot at hagrid as they walked through the little town to the station. harry couldn?t blame them. not only was ha-grid twice as tall as anyone else, he kept pointing at perfectly ordinary things like parking meters and saying loudly, ?see that, harry? things these muggles dream up, eh??
  ?hagrid,? said harry, panting a bit as he ran to keep up, ?did you say there are dragons at gringotts??
?well, so they say,? said hagrid. ?crikey, i?d like a dragon.? ?you?d like one??
?wanted one ever since i was a kid ? here we go.?
  they had reached the station. there was a train to london in five minutes? time. hagrid, who didn?t understand ?muggle money,? as he called it, gave the bills to harry so he could buy their tickets.
 people stared more than ever on the train. hagrid took up two seats and sat knitting what looked like a canary-yellow circus tent. ?still got yer letter, harry?? he asked as he counted stitches.

harry took the parchment envelope out of his pocket.
  ?good,? said hagrid. ?there?s a list there of everything yeh need.?
  harry unfolded a second piece of paper he hadn?t noticed the night before, and read:
hogwarts school
of witchcraft and wizardry

uniform
first-year students will require:
1. three sets of plain work robes (black)
2. one plain pointed hat (black) for day wear
3. one pair of protective gloves (dragon hide or similar)
4. one winter cloak (black, silver fastenings)
please note that all pupils? clothes should carry name tags
course books
all students should have a copy of each of the following: the standard book of spels (grade 1)
by miranda goshawk
a history of magic by bathilda bagshot
magical theory by adalbert waffling
a beginners? guide to transfiguration by emeric switch one thousand magical herbs and fungi
by phyllida spore
magical drafts and potions by arsenius jigger

fantastic beasts and where to find them
by newt scamander
the dark forces: a guide to self-protection
by quentin trimble
other equipment
1 wand
1 cauldron (pewter, standard size 2)
1 set glass or crystal phials
1 telescope
1 set brass scales
students may also bring an owl or a cat or a toad
parents are reminded that first years are not allowed their own broomsticks
?can we buy all this in london?? harry wondered aloud. ?if yeh know where to go,? said hagrid.
harry had never been to london before. although hagrid seemed to know where he was going, he was obviously not used to getting there in an ordinary way. he got stuck in the ticket barrier on the underground, and complained loudly that the seats were too small and the trains too slow.
  ?i don?t know how the muggles manage without magic,? he said as they climbed a broken-down escalator that led up to a bustling road lined with shops.
hagrid was so huge that he parted the crowd easily; all harry

had to do was keep close behind him. they passed book shops and music stores, hamburger restaurants and cinemas, but nowhere that looked as if it could sell you a magic wand. this was just an ordinary street full of ordinary people. could there really be piles of wizard gold buried miles beneath them? were there really shops that sold spell books and broomsticks? might this not all be some huge joke that the dursleys had cooked up? if harry hadn?t known that the dursleys had no sense of humor, he might have thought so; yet somehow, even though everything hagrid had told him so far was unbelievable, harry couldn?t help trusting him.
  ?this is it,? said hagrid, coming to a halt, ?the leaky cauldron. it?s a famous place.?
  it was a tiny, grubby-looking pub. if hagrid hadn?t pointed it out, harry wouldn?t have noticed it was there. the people hurrying by didn?t glance at it. their eyes slid from the big book shop on one side to the record shop on the other as if they couldn?t see the leaky cauldron at all. in fact, harry had the most peculiar feeling that only he and hagrid could see it. before he could mention this, ha-grid had steered him inside.
  for a famous place, it was very dark and shabby. a few old women were sitting in a corner, drinking tiny glasses of sherry. one of them was smoking a long pipe. a little man in a top hat was talking to the old bartender, who was quite bald and looked like a toothless walnut. the low buzz of chatter stopped when they walked in. everyone seemed to know hagrid; they waved and smiled at him, and the bartender reached for a glass, saying, ?the usual, hagrid??

  ?can?t, tom, i?m on hogwarts business,? said hagrid, clapping his great hand on harry?s shoulder and making harry?s knees buckle.
  ?good lord,? said the bartender, peering at harry, ?is this ? can this be ? ??
  the leaky cauldron had suddenly gone completely still and silent.
  ?bless my soul,? whispered the old bartender, ?harry potter . . . what an honor.?
  he hurried out from behind the bar, rushed toward harry and seized his hand, tears in his eyes.
?welcome back, mr. potter, welcome back.?
  harry didn?t know what to say. everyone was looking at him. the old woman with the pipe was puffing on it without realizing it had gone out. hagrid was beaming.
  then there was a great scraping of chairs and the next moment, harry found himself shaking hands with everyone in the leaky cauldron.
  ?doris crockford, mr. potter, can?t believe i?m meeting you at last.?
?so proud, mr. potter, i?m just so proud.?
 ?always wanted to shake your hand ? i?m all of a flutter.? ?delighted, mr. potter, just can?t tell you, diggle?s the name, dedalus diggle.?
  ?i?ve seen you before!? said harry, as dedalus diggle?s top hat fell off in his excitement. ?you bowed to me once in a shop.?
  ?he remembers!? cried dedalus diggle, looking around at everyone. ?did you hear that? he remembers me!?

  harry shook hands again and again ? doris crockford kept coming back for more.
  a pale young man made his way forward, very nervously. one of his eyes was twitching.
  ?professor quirrell!? said hagrid. ?harry, professor quirrell will be one of your teachers at hogwarts.?
  ?p-p-potter,? stammered professor quirrell, grasping harry?s hand, ?c-can?t t-tell you how p-pleased i am to meet you.?
?what sort of magic do you teach, professor quirrell??
  ?d-defense against the d-d-dark arts,? muttered professor quirrell, as though he?d rather not think about it. ?n-not that you n-need it, eh, p-p-potter?? he laughed nervously. ?you?ll be g-getting all your equipment, i suppose? i?ve g-got to p-pick up a new b-book on vampires, m-myself.? he looked terrified at the very thought.
  but the others wouldn?t let professor quirrell keep harry to himself. it took almost ten minutes to get away from them all. at last, hagrid managed to make himself heard over the babble.
?must get on ? lots ter buy come on, harry.?
  doris crockford shook harry?s hand one last time, and hagrid led them through the bar and out into a small, walled courtyard, where there was nothing but a trash can and a few weeds.
hagrid grinned at harry.
  ?told yeh, didn?t i? told yeh you was famous. even professor quirrell was tremblin? ter meet yeh ? mind you, he?s usually tremblin?.?
?is he always that nervous??
?oh, yeah. poor bloke. brilliant mind. he was fine while he was

studyin? outta books but then he took a year off ter get some first-hand experience. . . . they say he met vampires in the black forest, and there was a nasty bit o? trouble with a hag ? never been the same since. scared of the students, scared of his own subject ? now, where ?s me umbrella??
  vampires? hags? harry?s head was swimming. hagrid, mean-while, was counting bricks in the wall above the trash can.
  ?three up . . . two across . . .? he muttered. ?right, stand back, harry.?
he tapped the wall three times with the point of his umbrella.
  the brick he had touched quivered ? it wriggled ? in the middle, a small hole appeared ? it grew wider and wider ? a second later they were facing an archway large enough even for ha-grid, an archway onto a cobbled street that twisted and turned out of sight.
?welcome,? said hagrid, ?to diagon alley.?
  he grinned at harry?s amazement. they stepped through the archway. harry looked quickly over his shoulder and saw the arch-way shrink instantly back into solid wall.
  the sun shone brightly on a stack of cauldrons outside the nearest shop. cauldrons ? all sizes ? copper, brass, pewter, silver ? self-stirring ? collapsible, said a sign hanging over them.
  ?yeah, you?ll be needin? one,? said hagrid, ?but we gotta get yer money first.?
  harry wished he had about eight more eyes. he turned his head in every direction as they walked up the street, trying to look at everything at once: the shops, the things outside them, the people doing their shopping. a plump woman outside an apothecary was

shaking her head as they passed, saying, ?dragon liver, sixteen sickles an ounce, they?re mad.
  a low, soft hooting came from a dark shop with a sign saying eeylops owl emporium ? tawny, screech, barn, brown, and snowy. several boys of about harry?s age had their noses pressed against a window with broomsticks in it. ?look,? harry heard one of them say, ?the new nimbus two thousand ? fastest ever ?? there were shops selling robes, shops selling telescopes and strange silver instruments harry had never seen before, windows stacked with barrels of bat spleens and eels? eyes, tottering piles of spell books, quills, and rolls of parchment, potion bottles, globes of the moon. . . .
?gringotts,? said hagrid.
  they had reached a snowy white building that towered over the other little shops. standing beside its burnished bronze doors, wearing a uniform of scarlet and gold, was ?
  ?yeah, that?s a goblin,? said hagrid quietly as they walked up the white stone steps toward him. the goblin was about a head shorter than harry. he had a swarthy, clever face, a pointed beard and, harry noticed, very long fingers and feet. he bowed as they walked inside. now they were facing a second pair of doors, silver this time, with words engraved upon them:
enter, stranger, but take heed of what awaits the sin of greed,
for those who take, but do not earn, must pay most dearly in their turn. so if you seek beneath our floors a treasure that was never yours,

 thief, you have been warned, beware of finding more than treasure there.
?like i said, yeh?d be mad ter try an? rob it,? said hagrid.
  a pair of goblins bowed them through the silver doors and they were in a vast marble hall. about a hundred more goblins were sitting on high stools behind a long counter, scribbling in large ledgers, weighing coins in brass scales, examining precious stones through eyeglasses. there were too many doors to count leading off the hall, and yet more goblins were showing people in and out of these. hagrid and harry made for the counter.
  ?morning,? said hagrid to a free goblin. ?we?ve come ter take some money outta mr. harry potter?s safe.?
?you have his key, sir??
  ?got it here somewhere,? said hagrid, and he started emptying his pockets onto the counter, scattering a handful of moldy dog biscuits over the goblins book of numbers. the goblin wrinkled his nose. harry watched the goblin on their right weighing a pile of rubies as big as glowing coals.
?got it,? said hagrid at last, holding up a tiny golden key. the goblin looked at it closely.
?that seems to be in order.?
  ?an? i?ve also got a letter here from professor dumbledore,? said hagrid importantly, throwing out his chest. ?it?s about the you-know-what in vault seven hundred and thirteen.?
the goblin read the letter carefully.
  ?very well,? he said, handing it back to hagrid, ?i will have someone take you down to both vaults. griphook!?
griphook was yet another goblin. once hagrid had crammed

all the dog biscuits back inside his pockets, he and harry followed griphook toward one of the doors leading off the hall.
  ?what?s the you-know-what in vault seven hundred and thirteen?? harry asked.
  ?can?t tell yeh that,? said hagrid mysteriously. ?very secret. hogwarts business. dumbledore?s trusted me. more?n my job?s worth ter tell yeh that.?
  griphook held the door open for them. harry, who had expected more marble, was surprised. they were in a narrow stone passageway lit with flaming torches. it sloped steeply down-ward and there were little railway tracks on the floor. griphook whistled and a small cart came hurtling up the tracks toward them. they climbed in ? hagrid with some difficulty ? and were off.
  at first they just hurtled through a maze of twisting passages. harry tried to remember, left, right, right, left, middle fork, right, left, but it was impossible. the rattling cart seemed to know its own way, because griphook wasn?t steering.
  harry?s eyes stung as the cold air rushed past them, but he kept them wide open. once, he thought he saw a burst of fire at the end of a passage and twisted around to see if it was a dragon, but too late ? they plunged even deeper, passing an underground lake where huge stalactites and stalagmites grew from the ceiling and floor.
?i never know,? harry called to hagrid over the noise of the cart, ?what?s the difference between a stalagmite and a stalactite??
  ?stalagmite?s got an ?m? in it,? said hagrid. ?an? don? ask me questions just now, i think i?m gonna be sick.?

  he did look very green, and when the cart stopped at last beside a small door in the passage wall, hagrid got out and had to lean against the wall to stop his knees from trembling.
  griphook unlocked the door. a lot of green smoke came billowing out, and as it cleared, harry gasped. inside were mounds of gold coins. columns of silver. heaps of little bronze knuts.
?all yours,? smiled hagrid.
  all harry?s ? it was incredible. the dursleys couldn?t have known about this or they?d have had it from him faster than blinking. how often had they complained how much harry cost them to keep? and all the time there had been a small fortune belonging to him, buried deep under london.
hagrid helped harry pile some of it into a bag.
  ?the gold ones are galleons,? he explained. ?seventeen silver sickles to a galleon and twenty-nine knuts to a sickle, it?s easy enough. right, that should be enough fer a couple o? terms, we?ll keep the rest safe for yeh.? he turned to griphook. ?vault seven hundred and thirteen now, please, and can we go more slowly??
?one speed only,? said griphook.
  they were going even deeper now and gathering speed. the air became colder and colder as they hurtled round tight corners. they went rattling over an underground ravine, and harry leaned over the side to try to see what was down at the dark bottom, but ha-grid groaned and pulled him back by the scruff of his neck.
vault seven hundred and thirteen had no keyhole.
  ?stand back,? said griphook importantly. he stroked the door gently with one of his long fingers and it simply melted away.

  ?if anyone but a gringotts goblin tried that, they?d be sucked through the door and trapped in there,? said griphook.
 ?how often do you check to see if anyone?s inside?? harry asked. ?about once every ten years,? said griphook with a rather nasty grin.
  something really extraordinary had to be inside this top security vault, harry was sure, and he leaned forward eagerly, expecting to see fabulous jewels at the very least ? but at first he thought it was empty. then he noticed a grubby little package wrapped up in brown paper lying on the floor. hagrid picked it up and tucked it deep inside his coat. harry longed to know what it was, but knew better than to ask.
  ?come on, back in this infernal cart, and don?t talk to me on the way back, its best if i keep me mouth shut,? said hagrid.
one wild cart ride later they stood blinking in the sunlight outside gringotts. harry didn?t know where to run first now that he had a bag full of money. he didn?t have to know how many galleons there were to a pound to know that he was holding more money than he?d had in his whole life ? more money than even dudley had ever had.
  ?might as well get yer uniform,? said hagrid, nodding toward madam malkin?s robes for all occasions. ?listen, harry, would yeh mind if i slipped off fer a pick-me-up in the leaky cauldron? i hate them gringotts carts.? he did still look a bit sick, so harry entered madam malkin?s shop alone, feeling nervous.
  madam malkin was a squat, smiling witch dressed all in mauve.

  ?hogwarts, dear?? she said, when harry started to speak. ?got the lot here ? another young man being fitted up just now, in fact.?
  in the back of the shop, a boy with a pale, pointed face was standing on a footstool while a second witch pinned up his long black robes. madam malkin stood harry on a stool next to him, slipped a long robe over his head, and began to pin it to the right length.
?hello,? said the boy, ?hogwarts, too??
?yes,? said harry.
  ?my father?s next door buying my books and mother?s up the street looking at wands,? said the boy. he had a bored, drawling voice. ?then i?m going to drag them off to look at racing brooms. i don?t see why first years can?t have their own. i think i?ll bully father into getting me one and i?ll smuggle it in somehow.?
harry was strongly reminded of dudley.
?have you got your own broom?? the boy went on.
?no,? said harry.
?play quidditch at all??
  ?no,? harry said again, wondering what on earth quidditch could be.
  ?i do ? father says it?s a crime if i?m not picked to play for my house, and i must say, i agree. know what house you?ll be in yet??
?no,? said harry, feeling more stupid by the minute.
  ?well, no one really knows until they get there, do they, but i know i?ll be in slytherin, all our family have been ? imagine being in hufflepuff, i think i?d leave, wouldn?t you??

  ?mmm,? said harry, wishing he could say something a bit more interesting.
  ?i say, look at that man!? said the boy suddenly, nodding toward the front window. hagrid was standing there, grinning at harry and pointing at two large ice creams to show he couldn?t come in.
  ?that?s hagrid,? said harry, pleased to know something the boy didn?t. ?he works at hogwarts.?
  ?oh,? said the boy, ?i?ve heard of him. he?s a sort of servant, isn?t he??
  ?he?s the gamekeeper,? said harry. he was liking the boy less and less every second.
  ?yes, exactly. i heard he?s a sort of savage ? lives in a hut on the school grounds and every now and then he gets drunk, tries to do magic, and ends up setting fire to his bed.?
?i think he?s brilliant,? said harry coldly.
  ?do you?? said the boy, with a slight sneer. ?why is he with you? where are your parents??
  ?they?re dead,? said harry shortly. he didn?t feel much like going into the matter with this boy.
  ?oh, sorry,? said the other, not sounding sorry at all. ?but they were our kind, weren?t they??
?they were a witch and wizard, if that?s what you mean.?
  ?i really don?t think they should let the other sort in, do you? they?re just not the same, they?ve never been brought up to know our ways. some of them have never even heard of hogwarts until they get the letter, imagine. i think they should keep it in the old wizarding families. what?s your surname, anyway??
but before harry could answer, madam malkin said, ?that?s

you done, my dear,? and harry, not sorry for an excuse to stop talking to the boy, hopped down from the footstool.
  ?well, i?ll see you at hogwarts, i suppose,? said the drawling boy.
 harry was rather quiet as he ate the ice cream hagrid had bought him (chocolate and raspberry with chopped nuts). ?what?s up?? said hagrid.
  ?nothing,? harry lied. they stopped to buy parchment and quills. harry cheered up a bit when he found a bottle of ink that changed color as you wrote. when they had left the shop, he said, ?hagrid, what?s quidditch??
  ?blimey, harry, i keep forgettin? how little yeh know ? not knowin? about quidditch!?
  ?don?t make me feel worse,? said harry. he told hagrid about the pale boy in madam malkin?s.
  ?? and he said people from muggle families shouldn?t even be allowed in ??
  ?yer not from a muggle family. if he?d known who yeh were ? he?s grown up knowin? yer name if his parents are wizardin? folk. you saw what everyone in the leaky cauldron was like when they saw yeh. anyway, what does he know about it, some o? the best i ever saw were the only ones with magic in ?em in a long line o? muggles ? look at yer mum! look what she had fer a sister!?
?so what is quidditch??
  ?it?s our sport. wizard sport. it?s like ? like soccer in the muggle world ? everyone follows quidditch ? played up in the air on broomsticks and there?s four balls ? sorta hard ter explain the rules.?

?and what are slytherin and hufflepuff??
  ?school houses. there?s four. everyone says hufflepuff are a lot o? duffers, but ??
?i bet i?m in hufflepuff,? said harry gloomily.
  ?better hufflepuff than slytherin,? said hagrid darkly. ?there?s not a single witch or wizard who went bad who wasn?t in slytherin. you-know-who was one.?
?vol-, sorry ? you-know-who was at hogwarts??
?years an? years ago,? said hagrid.
  they bought harry?s school books in a shop called flourish and blotts where the shelves were stacked to the ceiling with books as large as paving stones bound in leather; books the size of postage stamps in covers of silk; books full of peculiar symbols and a few books with nothing in them at all. even dudley, who never read anything, would have been wild to get his hands on some of these. hagrid almost had to drag harry away from curses and counter-curses (bewitch your friends and befuddle your enemies with the latest revenges: hair loss, jely-legs, tongue- tying and much, much more) by professor vindictus viridian.
?i was trying to find out how to curse dudley.?
  ?i?m not sayin? that?s not a good idea, but yer not ter use magic in the muggle world except in very special circumstances,? said hagrid. ?an? anyway, yeh couldn? work any of them curses yet, yeh?ll need a lot more study before yeh get ter that level.?
  hagrid wouldn?t let harry buy a solid gold cauldron, either (?it says pewter on yer list?), but they got a nice set of scales for weighing potion ingredients and a collapsible brass telescope. then they visited the apothecary, which was fascinating enough to make up

for its horrible smell, a mixture of bad eggs and rotted cabbages. barrels of slimy stuff stood on the floor; jars of herbs, dried roots, and bright powders lined the walls; bundles of feathers, strings of fangs, and snarled claws hung from the ceiling. while hagrid asked the man behind the counter for a supply of some basic potion ingredients for harry, harry himself examined silver unicorn horns at twenty-one galleons each and minuscule, glittery-black beetle eyes (five knuts a scoop).
outside the apothecary, hagrid checked harry?s list again.
  ?just yer wand left ? oh yeah, an? i still haven?t got yeh a birth-day present.?
harry felt himself go red.
?you don?t have to ??
  ?i know i don?t have to. tell yeh what, i?ll get yer animal. not a toad, toads went outta fashion years ago, yeh?d be laughed at ? an? i don? like cats, they make me sneeze. i?ll get yer an owl. all the kids want owls, they?re dead useful, carry yer mail an? everythin?.?
  twenty minutes later, they left eeylops owl emporium, which had been dark and full of rustling and flickering, jewel-bright eyes. harry now carried a large cage that held a beautiful snowy owl, fast asleep with her head under her wing. he couldn?t stop stammering his thanks, sounding just like professor quirrell.
  ?don? mention it,? said hagrid gruffly. ?don? expect you?ve had a lotta presents from them dursleys. just ollivanders left now ? only place fer wands, ollivanders, and yeh gotta have the best wand.?
  a magic wand . . . this was what harry had been really looking forward to.

  the last shop was narrow and shabby. peeling gold letters over the door read ollivanders: makers of fine wands since 382 b.c. a single wand lay on a faded purple cushion in the dusty window.
  a tinkling bell rang somewhere in the depths of the shop as they stepped inside. it was a tiny place, empty except for a single, spindly chair that hagrid sat on to wait. harry felt strangely as though he had entered a very strict library; he swallowed a lot of new questions that had just occurred to him and looked instead at the thousands of narrow boxes piled neatly right up to the ceiling. for some reason, the back of his neck prickled. the very dust and silence in here seemed to tingle with some secret magic.
  ?good afternoon,? said a soft voice. harry jumped. hagrid must have jumped, too, because there was a loud crunching noise and he got quickly off the spindly chair.
  an old man was standing before them, his wide, pale eyes shining like moons through the gloom of the shop.
?hello,? said harry awkwardly.
  ?ah yes,? said the man. ?yes, yes. i thought i?d be seeing you soon. harry potter.? it wasn?t a question. ?you have your mother?s eyes. it seems only yesterday she was in here herself, buying her first wand. ten and a quarter inches long, swishy, made of willow. nice wand for charm work.?
  mr. ollivander moved closer to harry. harry wished he would blink. those silvery eyes were a bit creepy.
  ?your father, on the other hand, favored a mahogany wand. eleven inches. pliable. a little more power and excellent for trans-figuration. well, i say your father favored it ? it?s really the wand that chooses the wizard, of course.?

 mr. ollivander had come so close that he and harry were almost nose to nose. harry could see himself reflected in those misty eyes. ?and that?s where . . .?
  mr. ollivander touched the lightning scar on harry?s forehead with a long, white finger.
  ?i?m sorry to say i sold the wand that did it,? he said softly. ?thirteen-and-a-half inches. yew. powerful wand, very powerful, and in the wrong hands . . . well, if i?d known what that wand was going out into the world to do. . . .?
 he shook his head and then, to harry?s relief, spotted hagrid. ?rubeus! rubeus hagrid! how nice to see you again. . . . oak, sixteen inches, rather bendy, wasn?t it??
?it was, sir, yes,? said hagrid.
  ?good wand, that one. but i suppose they snapped it in half when you got expelled?? said mr. ollivander, suddenly stern.
  ?er ? yes, they did, yes, ? said hagrid, shuffling his feet. ?i?ve still got the pieces, though,? he added brightly.
?but you don?t use them?? said mr. ollivander sharply.
  ?oh, no, sir,? said hagrid quickly. harry noticed he gripped his pink umbrella very tightly as he spoke.
  ?hmmm,? said mr. ollivander, giving hagrid a piercing look. ?well, now ? mr. potter. let me see.? he pulled a long tape measure with silver markings out of his pocket. ?which is your wand arm??
?er ? well, i?m right-handed,? said harry.
  ?hold out your arm. that?s it.? he measured harry from shoulder to finger, then wrist to elbow, shoulder to floor, knee to armpit and round his head. as he measured, he said, ?every ollivander

wand has a core of a powerful magical substance, mr. potter. we use unicorn hairs, phoenix tail feathers, and the heartstrings of dragons. no two ollivander wands are the same, just as no two unicorns, dragons, or phoenixes are quite the same. and of course, you will never get such good results with another wizard?s wand.?
  harry suddenly realized that the tape measure, which was measuring between his nostrils, was doing this on its own. mr. ollivander was flitting around the shelves, taking down boxes.
  ?that will do,? he said, and the tape measure crumpled into a heap on the floor. ?right then, mr. potter. try this one. beech-wood and dragon heartstring. nine inches. nice and flexible. just take it and give it a wave.?
  harry took the wand and (feeling foolish) waved it around a bit, but mr. ollivander snatched it out of his hand almost at once.
  ?maple and phoenix feather. seven inches. quite whippy. try ??
  harry tried ? but he had hardly raised the wand when it, too, was snatched back by mr. ollivander.
  ?no, no ? here, ebony and unicorn hair, eight and a half inches, springy. go on, go on, try it out.?
  harry tried. and tried. he had no idea what mr. ollivander was waiting for. the pile of tried wands was mounting higher and higher on the spindly chair, but the more wands mr. ollivander pulled from the shelves, the happier he seemed to become.
  ?tricky customer, eh? not to worry, we?ll find the perfect match here somewhere ? i wonder, now ? yes, why not ? unusual combination ? holly and phoenix feather, eleven inches, nice and supple.?

  harry took the wand. he felt a sudden warmth in his fingers. he raised the wand above his head, brought it swishing down through the dusty air and a stream of red and gold sparks shot from the end like a firework, throwing dancing spots of light on to the walls. hagrid whooped and clapped and mr. ollivander cried, ?oh, bravo! yes, indeed, oh, very good. well, well, well . . . how curious . . . how very curious . . .?
  he put harry?s wand back into its box and wrapped it in brown paper, still muttering, ?curious . . . curious . . .?
?sorry,? said harry, ?but what?s curious??
mr. ollivander fixed harry with his pale stare.
  ?i remember every wand i?ve ever sold, mr. potter. every single wand. it so happens that the phoenix whose tail feather is in your wand, gave another feather ? just one other. it is very curious in-deed that you should be destined for this wand when its brother ? why, its brother gave you that scar.?
harry swallowed.
  ?yes, thirteen-and-a-half inches. yew. curious indeed how these things happen. the wand chooses the wizard, remember. . . . i think we must expect great things from you, mr. potter. . . . after all, he-who-must-not-be-named did great things ? terrible, yes, but great.?
  harry shivered. he wasn?t sure he liked mr. ollivander too much. he paid seven gold galleons for his wand, and mr. ollivander bowed them from his shop.
the late afternoon sun hung low in the sky as harry and hagrid made their way back down diagon alley, back through the wall,

back through the leaky cauldron, now empty harry didn?t speak at all as they walked down the road; he didn?t even notice how much people were gawking at them on the underground, laden as they were with all their funny-shaped packages, with the snowy owl asleep in its cage on harry?s lap. up another escalator, out into paddington station; harry only realized where they were when ha-grid tapped him on the shoulder.
?got time fer a bite to eat before yer train leaves,? he said.
  he bought harry a hamburger and they sat down on plastic seats to eat them. harry kept looking around. everything looked so strange, somehow.
?you all right, harry? yer very quiet,? said hagrid.
  harry wasn?t sure he could explain. he?d just had the best birth-day of his life ? and yet ? he chewed his hamburger, trying to find the words.
  ?everyone thinks i?m special,? he said at last. ?all those people in the leaky cauldron, professor quirrell, mr. ollivander . . . but i don?t know anything about magic at all. how can they expect great things? i?m famous and i can?t even remember what i?m famous for. i don?t know what happened when vol-, sorry ? i mean, the night my parents died.?
  hagrid leaned across the table. behind the wild beard and eye-brows he wore a very kind smile.
  ?don? you worry, harry. you?ll learn fast enough. everyone starts at the beginning at hogwarts, you?ll be just fine. just be yerself. i know it?s hard. yeh?ve been singled out, an? that?s always hard. but yeh?ll have a great time at hogwarts ? i did ? still do, ?smatter of fact.?

  hagrid helped harry on to the train that would take him back to the dursleys, then handed him an envelope.
  ?yer ticket fer hogwarts,? he said. ?first o? september ? king?s cross ? it?s all on yer ticket. any problems with the dursleys, send me a letter with yer owl, she?ll know where to find me. . . . see yeh soon, harry.?
  the train pulled out of the station. harry wanted to watch ha-grid until he was out of sight; he rose in his seat and pressed his nose against the window, but he blinked and hagrid had gone.

c h a p t e r s i x

the journey from
platform nine
and three-quarters
h
 arry?s last month with the dursleys wasn?t fun. true, dudley was now so scared of harry he wouldn?t stay in the same room, while aunt petunia and uncle vernon didn?t shut harry in his cupboard, force him to do anything, or shout at him ? in fact, they didn?t speak to him at all. half terrified, half furious, they acted as though any chair with harry in it were empty. although this was an improvement in many ways, it did be-come a bit depressing after a while.
  harry kept to his room, with his new owl for company. he had decided to call her hedwig, a name he had found in a history of magic. his school books were very interesting. he lay on his bed reading late into the night, hedwig swooping in and out of the open window as she pleased. it was lucky that aunt petunia didn?t come in to vacuum anymore, because hedwig kept bringing back dead mice. every night before he went to sleep, harry ticked off

another day on the piece of paper he had pinned to the wall, counting down to september the first.
  on the last day of august he thought he?d better speak to his aunt and uncle about getting to king?s cross station the next day, so he went down to the living room where they were watching a quiz show on television. he cleared his throat to let them know he was there, and dudley screamed and ran from the room.
?er ? uncle vernon??
uncle vernon grunted to show he was listening.
  ?er ? i need to be at king?s cross tomorrow to ? to go to hogwarts.?
uncle vernon grunted again.
?would it be all right if you gave me a lift??
grunt. harry supposed that meant yes.
?thank you.?
  he was about to go back upstairs when uncle vernon actually spoke.
  ?funny way to get to a wizards? school, the train. magic carpets all got punctures, have they??
harry didn?t say anything.
?where is this school, anyway??
  ?i don?t know,? said harry, realizing this for the first time. he pulled the ticket hagrid had given him out of his pocket.
  ?i just take the train from platform nine and three-quarters at eleven o?clock,? he read.
his aunt and uncle stared.
?platform what??
?nine and three-quarters.?

  ?don?t talk rubbish,? said uncle vernon. ?there is no platform nine and three-quarters.?
?its on my ticket.?
  ?barking,? said uncle vernon, ?howling mad, the lot of them. you?ll see. you just wait. all right, we?ll take you to king?s cross. we?re going up to london tomorrow anyway, or i wouldn?t bother.?
  ?why are you going to london?? harry asked, trying to keep things friendly.
  ?taking dudley to the hospital,? growled uncle vernon. ?got to have that ruddy tail removed before he goes to smeltings.?
harry woke at five o?clock the next morning and was too excited and nervous to go back to sleep. he got up and pulled on his jeans because he didn?t want to walk into the station in his wizard?s robes ? he?d change on the train. he checked his hogwarts list yet again to make sure he had everything he needed, saw that hedwig was shut safely in her cage, and then paced the room, waiting for the dursleys to get up. two hours later, harry?s huge, heavy trunk had been loaded into the dursleys? car, aunt petunia had talked dudley into sitting next to harry, and they had set off.
  they reached king?s cross at half past ten. uncle vernon dumped harry?s trunk onto a cart and wheeled it into the station for him. harry thought this was strangely kind until uncle vernon stopped dead, facing the platforms with a nasty grin on his face.
  ?well, there you are, boy. platform nine ? platform ten. your platform should be somewhere in the middle, but they don?t seem to have built it yet, do they??

  he was quite right, of course. there was a big plastic number nine over one platform and a big plastic number ten over the one next to it, and in the middle, nothing at all.
  ?have a good term,? said uncle vernon with an even nastier smile. he left without another word. harry turned and saw the dursleys drive away. all three of them were laughing. harry?s mouth went rather dry. what on earth was he going to do? he was starting to attract a lot of funny looks, because of hedwig. he?d have to ask someone.
  he stopped a passing guard, but didn?t dare mention platform nine and three-quarters. the guard had never heard of hogwarts and when harry couldn?t even tell him what part of the country it was in, he started to get annoyed, as though harry was being stupid on purpose. getting desperate, harry asked for the train that left at eleven o?clock, but the guard said there wasn?t one. in the end the guard strode away, muttering about time wasters. harry was now trying hard not to panic. according to the large clock over the arrivals board, he had ten minutes left to get on the train to hog-warts and he had no idea how to do it; he was stranded in the middle of a station with a trunk he could hardly lift, a pocket full of wizard money, and a large owl.
  hagrid must have forgotten to tell him something you had to do, like tapping the third brick on the left to get into diagon alley. he wondered if he should get out his wand and start tapping the ticket inspector?s stand between platforms nine and ten.
  at that moment a group of people passed just behind him and he caught a few words of what they were saying.
?? packed with muggles, of course ??

  harry swung round. the speaker was a plump woman who was talking to four boys, all with flaming red hair. each of them was pushing a trunk like harry?s in front of him ? and they had an owl.
  heart hammering, harry pushed his cart after them. they stopped and so did he, just near enough to hear what they were saying.
 ?now, what?s the platform number?? said the boys? mother. ?nine and three-quarters!? piped a small girl, also red-headed, who was holding her hand, ?mom, can?t i go . . .?
  ?you?re not old enough, ginny, now be quiet. all right, percy, you go first.?
  what looked like the oldest boy marched toward platforms nine and ten. harry watched, careful not to blink in case he missed it ? but just as the boy reached the dividing barrier between the two platforms, a large crowd of tourists came swarming in front of him and by the time the last backpack had cleared away, the boy had vanished.
?fred, you next,? the plump woman said.
 ?i?m not fred, i?m george,? said the boy. ?honestly, woman, you call yourself our mother? can?t you tel i?m george?? ?sorry, george, dear.?
  ?only joking, i am fred,? said the boy, and off he went. his twin called after him to hurry up, and he must have done so, be-cause a second later, he had gone ? but how had he done it?
  now the third brother was walking briskly toward the barrier ? he was almost there ? and then, quite suddenly, he wasn?t any-where.

there was nothing else for it.
?excuse me,? harry said to the plump woman.
?hello, dear,? she said. ?first time at hogwarts? ron?s new, too.?
  she pointed at the last and youngest of her sons. he was tall, thin, and gangling, with freckles, big hands and feet, and a long nose.
  ?yes,? said harry. ?the thing is ? the thing is, i don?t know how to ??
  ?how to get onto the platform?? she said kindly, and harry nodded.
  ?not to worry,? she said. ?all you have to do is walk straight at the barrier between platforms nine and ten. don?t stop and don?t be scared you?ll crash into it, that?s very important. best do it at a bit of a run if you?re nervous. go on, go now before ron.?
?er ? okay,? said harry.
  he pushed his trolley around and stared at the barrier. it looked very solid.
  he started to walk toward it. people jostled him on their way to platforms nine and ten. harry walked more quickly. he was going to smash right into that barrier and then he?d be in trouble ? leaning forward on his cart, he broke into a heavy run ? the barrier was coming nearer and nearer ? he wouldn?t be able to stop ? the cart was out of control ? he was a foot away ? he closed his eyes ready for the crash ?
it didn?t come . . . he kept on running . . . he opened his eyes.
a scarlet steam engine was waiting next to a platform packed
with people. a sign overhead said hogwarts express, eleven
o?clock. harry looked behind him and saw a wrought-iron archway

where the barrier had been, with the words platform nine and three-quarters on it. he had done it.
  smoke from the engine drifted over the heads of the chattering crowd, while cats of every color wound here and there between their legs. owls hooted to one another in a disgruntled sort of way over the babble and the scraping of heavy trunks.
  the first few carriages were already packed with students, some hanging out of the window to talk to their families, some fighting over seats. harry pushed his cart off down the platform in search of an empty seat. he passed a round-faced boy who was saying, ?gran, i?ve lost my toad again.?
?oh, nevile,? he heard the old woman sigh.
a boy with dreadlocks was surrounded by a small crowd. ?give us a look, lee, go on.?
  the boy lifted the lid of a box in his arms, and the people around him shrieked and yelled as something inside poked out a long, hairy leg.
  harry pressed on through the crowd until he found an empty compartment near the end of the train. he put hedwig inside first and then started to shove and heave his trunk toward the train door. he tried to lift it up the steps but could hardly raise one end and twice he dropped it painfully on his foot.
  ?want a hand?? it was one of the red-haired twins he?d followed through the barrier.
?yes, please,? harry panted.
?oy, fred! c?mere and help!?
  with the twins? help, harry?s trunk was at last tucked away in a corner of the compartment.

 ?thanks,? said harry, pushing his sweaty hair out of his eyes. ?what?s that?? said one of the twins suddenly, pointing at harry?s lightning scar.
?blimey,? said the other twin. ?are you ? ??
?he is,? said the first twin. ?aren?t you?? he added to harry. ?what?? said harry.
?harry potter,? chorused the twins.
?oh, him,? said harry. ?i mean, yes, i am.?
  the two boys gawked at him, and harry felt himself turning red. then, to his relief, a voice came floating in through the train?s open door.
?fred? george? are you there??
?coming, mom.?
with a last look at harry, the twins hopped off the train.
  harry sat down next to the window where, half hidden, he could watch the red-haired family on the platform and hear what they were saying. their mother had just taken out her handkerchief.
?ron, you?ve got something on your nose.?
  the youngest boy tried to jerk out of the way, but she grabbed him and began rubbing the end of his nose.
?mom ? geroff.? he wriggled free.
  ?aaah, has ickle ronnie got somefink on his nosie?? said one of the twins.
?shut up,? said ron.
?where?s percy?? said their mother.
?he?s coming now.?
the oldest boy came striding into sight. he had already changed

into his billowing black hogwarts robes, and harry noticed a shiny red and gold badge on his chest with the letter p on it.
  ?can?t stay long, mother,? he said. ?i?m up front, the prefects have got two compartments to themselves ??
  ?oh, are you a prefect, percy?? said one of the twins, with an air of great surprise. ?you should have said something, we had no idea.?
  ?hang on, i think i remember him saying something about it,? said the other twin. ?once ??
?or twice ??
?a minute ??
?all summer ??
?oh, shut up,? said percy the prefect.
  ?how come percy gets new robes, anyway?? said one of the twins.
  ?because he?s a prefect,? said their mother fondly. ?all right, dear, well, have a good term ? send me an owl when you get there.?
  she kissed percy on the cheek and he left. then she turned to the twins.
 ?now, you two ? this year, you behave yourselves. if i get one more owl telling me you?ve ? you?ve blown up a toilet or ?? ?blown up a toilet? we?ve never blown up a toilet.?
?great idea though, thanks, mom.?
?it?s not funny. and look after ron.?
?don?t worry, ickle ronniekins is safe with us.?
?shut up,? said ron again. he was almost as tall as the twins al-ready and his nose was still pink where his mother had rubbed it. ?hey, mom, guess what? guess who we just met on the train??

 harry leaned back quickly so they couldn?t see him looking. ?you know that black-haired boy who was near us in the station? know who he is??
?who??
?harry potter!?
harry heard the little girl?s voice.
  ?oh, mom, can i go on the train and see him, mom, oh please. . . .?
?you?ve already seen him, ginny, and the poor boy isn?t some
thing you goggle at in a zoo. is he really, fred? how do you know?? ?asked him. saw his scar. it?s really there ? like lightning.? ?poor dear ? no wonder he was alone, i wondered. he was ever
so polite when he asked how to get onto the platform.?
  ?never mind that, do you think he remembers what you-know-who looks like??
their mother suddenly became very stern.
  ?i forbid you to ask him, fred. no, don?t you dare. as though he needs reminding of that on his first day at school.?
?all right, keep your hair on.?
a whistle sounded.
  ?hurry up!? their mother said, and the three boys clambered onto the train. they leaned out of the window for her to kiss them good-bye, and their younger sister began to cry.
?don?t, ginny, we?ll send you loads of owls.?
?we?ll send you a hogwarts toilet seat.?
?george!?
?only joking, mom.?
the train began to move. harry saw the boys? mother waving

and their sister, half laughing, half crying, running to keep up with the train until it gathered too much speed, then she fell back and waved.
  harry watched the girl and her mother disappear as the train rounded the corner. houses flashed past the window. harry felt a great leap of excitement. he didn?t know what he was going to ? but it had to be better than what he was leaving behind.
  the door of the compartment slid open and the youngest red-headed boy came in.
  ?anyone sitting there?? he asked, pointing at the seat opposite harry. ?everywhere else is full.?
  harry shook his head and the boy sat down. he glanced at harry and then looked quickly out of the window, pretending he hadn?t looked. harry saw he still had a black mark on his nose.
?hey, ron.?
the twins were back.
  ?listen, we?re going down the middle of the train ? lee jordan?s got a giant tarantula down there.?
?right,? mumbled ron.
  ?harry,? said the other twin, ?did we introduce ourselves? fred and george weasley. and this is ron, our brother. see you later, then.?
  ?bye,? said harry and ron. the twins slid the compartment door shut behind them.
?are you really harry potter?? ron blurted out.
harry nodded.
  ?oh ? well, i thought it might be one of fred and george?s jokes,? said ron. ?and have you really got ? you know . . .?

he pointed at harry?s forehead.
  harry pulled back his bangs to show the lightning scar. ron stared.
?so that?s where you-know-who ? ??
?yes,? said harry, ?but i can?t remember it.?
?nothing?? said ron eagerly.
?well ? i remember a lot of green light, but nothing else.?
  ?wow,? said ron. he sat and stared at harry for a few moments, then, as though he had suddenly realized what he was doing, he looked quickly out of the window again.
  ?are all your family wizards?? asked harry, who found ron just as interesting as ron found him.
 ?er ? yes, i think so,? said ron. ?i think mom?s got a second cousin who?s an accountant, but we never talk about him.? ?so you must know loads of magic already.?
  the weasleys were clearly one of those old wizarding families the pale boy in diagon alley had talked about.
  ?i heard you went to live with muggles,? said ron. ?what are they like??
  ?horrible ? well, not all of them. my aunt and uncle and cousin are, though. wish i?d had three wizard brothers.?
  ?five,? said ron. for some reason, he was looking gloomy. ?i?m the sixth in our family to go to hogwarts. you could say i?ve got a lot to live up to. bill and charlie have already left ? bill was head boy and charlie was captain of quidditch. now percy?s a prefect. fred and george mess around a lot, but they still get really good marks and everyone thinks they?re really funny. everyone expects me to do as well as the others, but if i do, it?s no big deal, because

they did it first. you never get anything new, either, with five brothers. i?ve got bill?s old robes, charlie?s old wand, and percy?s old rat.?
  ron reached inside his jacket and pulled out a fat gray rat, which was asleep.
  ?his name?s scabbers and he?s useless, he hardly ever wakes up. percy got an owl from my dad for being made a prefect, but they couldn?t aff? i mean, i got scabbers instead.?
  ron?s ears went pink. he seemed to think he?d said too much, because he went back to staring out of the window.
  harry didn?t think there was anything wrong with not being able to afford an owl. after all, he?d never had any money in his life until a month ago, and he told ron so, all about having to wear dudley?s old clothes and never getting proper birthday presents. this seemed to cheer ron up.
  ?. . . and until hagrid told me, i didn?t know anything about being a wizard or about my parents or voldemort ??
ron gasped.
?what?? said harry.
?you said you-know-who?s name!? said ron, sounding both shocked and impressed. ?i?d have thought you, of all people ??
  ?i?m not trying to be brave or anything, saying the name,? said harry, ?i just never knew you shouldn?t. see what i mean? i?ve got loads to learn. . . . i bet,? he added, voicing for the first time some-thing that had been worrying him a lot lately, ?i bet i?m the worst in the class.?
  ?you won?t be. there?s loads of people who come from muggle families and they learn quick enough.?
while they had been talking, the train had carried them out of london. now they were speeding past fields full of cows and

sheep. they were quiet for a time, watching the fields and lanes flick past.
  around half past twelve there was a great clattering outside in the corridor and a smiling, dimpled woman slid back their door and said, ?anything off the cart, dears??
  harry, who hadn?t had any breakfast, leapt to his feet, but ron?s ears went pink again and he muttered that he?d brought sandwiches. harry went out into the corridor.
  he had never had any money for candy with the dursleys, and now that he had pockets rattling with gold and silver he was ready to buy as many mars bars as he could carry ? but the woman didn?t have mars bars. what she did have were bertie bott?s every flavor beans, drooble?s best blowing gum, chocolate frogs, pumpkin pasties, cauldron cakes, licorice wands, and a number of other strange things harry had never seen in his life. not wanting to miss anything, he got some of everything and paid the woman eleven silver sickles and seven bronze knuts.
  ron stared as harry brought it all back in to the compartment and tipped it onto an empty seat.
?hungry, are you??
  ?starving,? said harry, taking a large bite out of a pumpkin pasty.
  ron had taken out a lumpy package and unwrapped it. there were four sandwiches inside. he pulled one of them apart and said, ?she always forgets i don?t like corned beef.?
  ?swap you for one of these,? said harry, holding up a pasty. ?go on ??
  ?you don?t want this, its all dry,? said ron. ?she hasn?t got much time,? he added quickly, ?you know, with five of us.?

  ?go on, have a pasty,? said harry, who had never had any-thing to share before or, indeed, anyone to share it with. it was a nice feeling, sitting there with ron, eating their way through all harry?s pasties, cakes, and candies (the sandwiches lay for-gotten).
  ?what are these?? harry asked ron, holding up a pack of chocolate frogs. ?they?re not realy frogs, are they?? he was starting to feel that nothing would surprise him.
?no,? said ron. ?but see what the card is. i?m missing agrippa.? ?what??
  ?oh, of course, you wouldn?t know ? chocolate frogs have cards inside them, you know, to collect ? famous witches and wizards. i?ve got about five hundred, but i haven?t got agrippa or ptolemy.?
  harry unwrapped his chocolate frog and picked up the card. it showed a man?s face. he wore half-moon glasses, had a long, crooked nose, and flowing silver hair, beard, and mustache. underneath the picture was the name albus dumbledore.
?so this is dumbledore!? said harry.
  ?don?t tell me you?d never heard of dumbledore!? said ron. ?can i have a frog? i might get agrippa ? thanks ??
harry turned over his card and read:
albus dumbledore
currently headmaster of hogwarts
considered by many the greatest wizard of modern times, dumbledore is particularly famous for his defeat of the

dark wizard grindelwald in 1945, for the discovery of the twelve uses of dragon?s blood, and his work on alchemy with his partner, nicolas flamel. professor dumbledore enjoys chamber music and tenpin bowling.
harry turned the card back over and saw, to his astonishment, that dumbledore?s face had disappeared.
?he?s gone!?
  ?well, you can?t expect him to hang around all day,? said ron. ?he?ll be back. no, i?ve got morgana again and i?ve got about six of her . . . do you want it? you can start collecting.?
  ron?s eyes strayed to the pile of chocolate frogs waiting to be unwrapped.
  ?help yourself,? said harry. ?but in, you know, the muggle world, people just stay put in photos.?
  ?do they? what, they don?t move at all?? ron sounded amazed. ?weird!?
  harry stared as dumbledore sidled back into the picture on his card and gave him a small smile. ron was more interested in eating the frogs than looking at the famous witches and wizards cards, but harry couldn?t keep his eyes off them. soon he had not only dumbledore and morgana, but hengist of woodcraft, alberic grunnion, circe, paracelsus, and merlin. he finally tore his eyes away from the druidess cliodna, who was scratching her nose, to open a bag of bertie bott?s every flavor beans.
  ?you want to be careful with those,? ron warned harry. ?when they say every flavor, they mean every flavor ? you know, you get all the ordinary ones like chocolate and peppermint and mar-

malade, but then you can get spinach and liver and tripe. george reckons he had a booger-flavored one once.?
  ron picked up a green bean, looked at it carefully, and bit into a corner.
?bleaaargh ? see? sprouts.?
  they had a good time eating the every flavor beans. harry got toast, coconut, baked bean, strawberry, curry, grass, coffee, sardine, and was even brave enough to nibble the end off a funny gray one ron wouldn?t touch, which turned out to be pepper.
  the countryside now flying past the window was becoming wilder. the neat fields had gone. now there were woods, twisting rivers, and dark green hills.
  there was a knock on the door of their compartment and the round-faced boy harry had passed on platform nine and three-quarters came in. he looked tearful.
?sorry,? he said, ?but have you seen a toad at all??
  when they shook their heads, he wailed, ?i?ve lost him! he keeps getting away from me!?
?he?ll turn up,? said harry.
?yes,? said the boy miserably. ?well, if you see him . . .? he left.
  ?don?t know why he?s so bothered,? said ron. ?if i?d brought a toad i?d lose it as quick as i could. mind you, i brought scabbers, so i can?t talk.?
the rat was still snoozing on ron?s lap.
  ?he might have died and you wouldn?t know the difference,? said ron in disgust. ?i tried to turn him yellow yesterday to make him more interesting, but the spell didn?t work. i?ll show you, look . . .?

  he rummaged around in his trunk and pulled out a very battered-looking wand. it was chipped in places and something white was glinting at the end.
?unicorn hair?s nearly poking out. anyway ??
  he had just raised his wand when the compartment door slid open again. the toadless boy was back, but this time he had a girl with him. she was already wearing her new hogwarts robes.
  ?has anyone seen a toad? neville?s lost one,? she said. she had a bossy sort of voice, lots of bushy brown hair, and rather large front teeth.
 ?we?ve already told him we haven?t seen it,? said ron, but the girl wasn?t listening, she was looking at the wand in his hand. ?oh, are you doing magic? let?s see it, then.?
she sat down. ron looked taken aback.
?er ? all right.?
he cleared his throat.
?sunshine, daisies, butter melow, turn this stupid, fat rat yelow.?
  he waved his wand, but nothing happened. scabbers stayed gray and fast asleep.
  ?are you sure that?s a real spell?? said the girl. ?well, it?s not very good, is it? i?ve tried a few simple spells just for practice and it?s all worked for me. nobody in my family?s magic at all, it was ever such a surprise when i got my letter, but i was ever so pleased, of course, i mean, it?s the very best school of witchcraft there is, i?ve heard ? i?ve learned all our course books by heart, of course, i just hope it

will be enough ? i?m hermione granger, by the way, who are you??
she said all this very fast.
 harry looked at ron, and was relieved to see by his stunned face that he hadn?t learned all the course books by heart either. ?i?m ron weasley,? ron muttered.
?harry potter,? said harry.
  ?are you really?? said hermione. ?i know all about you, of course ? i got a few extra books for background reading, and you?re in modern magical history and the rise and fal of the dark arts and great wizarding events of the twentieth century.?
?am i?? said harry, feeling dazed.
  ?goodness, didn?t you know, i?d have found out everything i could if it was me,? said hermione. ?do either of you know what house you?ll be in? i?ve been asking around, and i hope i?m in gryffindor, it sounds by far the best; i hear dumbledore himself was in it, but i suppose ravenclaw wouldn?t be too bad. . . . any-way, we?d better go and look for neville?s toad. you two had better change, you know, i expect we?ll be there soon.?
and she left, taking the toadless boy with her.
  ?whatever house i?m in, i hope she?s not in it,? said ron. he threw his wand back into his trunk. ?stupid spell ? george gave it to me, bet he knew it was a dud.?
?what house are your brothers in?? asked harry.
  ?gryffindor,? said ron. gloom seemed to be settling on him again. ?mom and dad were in it, too. i don?t know what they?ll say if i?m not. i don?t suppose ravenclaw would be too bad, but imagine if they put me in slytherin.?

 ?that?s the house vol-, i mean, you-know-who was in?? ?yeah,? said ron. he flopped back into his seat, looking de-pressed.
  ?you know, i think the ends of scabbers? whiskers are a bit lighter,? said harry, trying to take ron?s mind off houses. ?so what do your oldest brothers do now that they?ve left, anyway??
  harry was wondering what a wizard did once he?d finished school.
  ?charlie?s in romania studying dragons, and bill?s in africa doing something for gringotts,? said ron. ?did you hear about gringotts? its been all over the daily prophet, but i don?t suppose you get that with the muggles ? someone tried to rob a high security vault.?
harry stared.
?really? what happened to them??
  ?nothing, that?s why it?s such big news. they haven?t been caught. my dad says it must?ve been a powerful dark wizard to get round gringotts, but they don?t think they took anything, that?s what?s odd. ?course, everyone gets scared when something like this happens in case you-know-who?s behind it.?
  harry turned this news over in his mind. he was starting to get a prickle of fear every time you-know-who was mentioned. he supposed this was all part of entering the magical world, but it had been a lot more comfortable saying ?voldemort? without worrying.
?what?s your quidditch team?? ron asked.
?er ? i don?t know any,? harry confessed.
?what!? ron looked dumbfounded. ?oh, you wait, it?s the best

game in the world ?? and he was off, explaining all about the four balls and the positions of the seven players, describing famous games he?d been to with his brothers and the broomstick he?d like to get if he had the money. he was just taking harry through the finer points of the game when the compartment door slid open yet again, but it wasn?t neville the toadless boy, or hermione granger this time.
  three boys entered, and harry recognized the middle one at once: it was the pale boy from madam malkin?s robe shop. he was looking at harry with a lot more interest than he?d shown back in diagon alley.
  ?is it true?? he said. ?they?re saying all down the train that harry potter?s in this compartment. so it?s you, is it??
  ?yes,? said harry. he was looking at the other boys. both of them were thickset and looked extremely mean. standing on either side of the pale boy, they looked like bodyguards.
  ?oh, this is crabbe and this is goyle,? said the pale boy carelessly, noticing where harry was looking. ?and my names malfoy, draco malfoy.?
  ron gave a slight cough, which might have been hiding a snigger. draco malfoy looked at him.
  ?think my name?s funny, do you? no need to ask who you are. my father told me all the weasleys have red hair, freckles, and more children than they can afford.?
  he turned back to harry. ?you?ll soon find out some wizarding families are much better than others, potter. you don?t want to go making friends with the wrong sort. i can help you there.?
he held out his hand to shake harry?s, but harry didn?t take it.

  ?i think i can tell who the wrong sort are for myself, thanks,? he said coolly.
  draco malfoy didn?t go red, but a pink tinge appeared in his pale cheeks.
  ?i?d be careful if i were you, potter,? he said slowly. ?unless you?re a bit politer you?ll go the same way as your parents. they didn?t know what was good for them, either. you hang around with riffraff like the weasleys and that hagrid, and it?ll rub off on you.?
both harry and ron stood up.
?say that again,? ron said, his face as red as his hair.
?oh, you?re going to fight us, are you?? malfoy sneered.
?unless you get out now,? said harry, more bravely than he felt,
because crabbe and goyle were a lot bigger than him or ron.
?but we don?t feel like leaving, do we, boys? we?ve eaten all our
food and you still seem to have some.?
  goyle reached toward the chocolate frogs next to ron ? ron leapt forward, but before he?d so much as touched goyle, goyle let out a horrible yell.
  scabbers the rat was hanging off his finger, sharp little teeth sunk deep into goyle?s knuckle ? crabbe and malfoy backed away as goyle swung scabbers round and round, howling, and when scabbers finally flew off and hit the window, all three of them disappeared at once. perhaps they thought there were more rats lurking among the sweets, or perhaps they?d heard footsteps, because a second later, hermione granger had come in.
  ?what has been going on?? she said, looking at the sweets all over the floor and ron picking up scabbers by his tail.
?i think he?s been knocked out,? ron said to harry. he looked

closer at scabbers. ?no ? i don?t believe it ? he?s gone back to sleep.?
and so he had.
?you?ve met malfoy before??
harry explained about their meeting in diagon alley.
  ?i?ve heard of his family, ? said ron darkly. ?they were some of the first to come back to our side after you-know-who disappeared. said they?d been bewitched. my dad doesn?t believe it. he says malfoy?s father didn?t need an excuse to go over to the dark side.? he turned to hermione. ?can we help you with some-thing??
  ?you?d better hurry up and put your robes on, i?ve just been up to the front to ask the conductor, and he says we?re nearly there. you haven?t been fighting, have you? you?ll be in trouble before we even get there!?
  ?scabbers has been fighting, not us,? said ron, scowling at her. ?would you mind leaving while we change??
  ?all right ? i only came in here because people outside are be-having very childishly, racing up and down the corridors,? said hermione in a sniffy voice. ?and you?ve got dirt on your nose, by the way, did you know??
  ron glared at her as she left. harry peered out of the window. it was getting dark. he could see mountains and forests under a deep purple sky. the train did seem to be slowing down.
  he and ron took off their jackets and pulled on their long black robes. ron?s were a bit short for him, you could see his sneakers underneath them.
a voice echoed through the train: ?we will be reaching hog

warts in five minutes? time. please leave your luggage on the train, it will be taken to the school separately.?
  harry?s stomach lurched with nerves and ron, he saw, looked pale under his freckles. they crammed their pockets with the last of the sweets and joined the crowd thronging the corridor.
  the train slowed right down and finally stopped. people pushed their way toward the door and out on to a tiny, dark platform. harry shivered in the cold night air. then a lamp came bobbing over the heads of the students, and harry heard a familiar voice: ?firs? years! firs? years over here! all right there, harry??
hagrid?s big hairy face beamed over the sea of heads.
  ?c?mon, follow me ? any more firs? years? mind yer step, now! firs? years follow me!?
  slipping and stumbling, they followed hagrid down what seemed to be a steep, narrow path. it was so dark on either side of them that harry thought there must be thick trees there. nobody spoke much. neville, the boy who kept losing his toad, sniffed once or twice.
  ?yeh?ll get yer firs? sight o? hogwarts in a sec,? hagrid called over his shoulder, ?jus? round this bend here.?
there was a loud ?oooooh!?
  the narrow path had opened suddenly onto the edge of a great black lake. perched atop a high mountain on the other side, its windows sparkling in the starry sky, was a vast castle with many turrets and towers.
  ?no more?n four to a boat!? hagrid called, pointing to a fleet of little boats sitting in the water by the shore. harry and ron were followed into their boat by neville and hermione.

  ?everyone in?? shouted hagrid, who had a boat to himself. ?right then ? forward!?
  and the fleet of little boats moved off all at once, gliding across the lake, which was as smooth as glass. everyone was silent, staring up at the great castle overhead. it towered over them as they sailed nearer and nearer to the cliff on which it stood.
  ?heads down!? yelled hagrid as the first boats reached the cliff; they all bent their heads and the little boats carried them through a curtain of ivy that hid a wide opening in the cliff face. they were carried along a dark tunnel, which seemed to be taking them right underneath the castle, until they reached a kind of underground harbor, where they clambered out onto rocks and pebbles.
  ?oy, you there! is this your toad?? said hagrid, who was checking the boats as people climbed out of them.
  ?trevor!? cried neville blissfully, holding out his hands. then they clambered up a passageway in the rock after hagrid?s lamp, coming out at last onto smooth, damp grass right in the shadow of the castle.
  they walked up a flight of stone steps and crowded around the huge, oak front door.
?everyone here? you there, still got yer toad??
  hagrid raised a gigantic fist and knocked three times on the castle door.

c h a p t e r s e v e n

the sorting hat
t
 he door swung open at once. a tall, black-haired witch in emerald-green robes stood there. she had a very stern face and harry?s first thought was that this was not someone to cross. ?the firs? years, professor mcgonagall,? said hagrid.
?thank you, hagrid. i will take them from here.?
  she pulled the door wide. the entrance hall was so big you could have fit the whole of the dursleys? house in it. the stone walls were lit with flaming torches like the ones at gringotts, the ceiling was too high to make out, and a magnificent marble stair-case facing them led to the upper floors.
  they followed professor mcgonagall across the flagged stone floor. harry could hear the drone of hundreds of voices from a doorway to the right ? the rest of the school must already be here ? but professor mcgonagall showed the first years into a small, empty chamber off the hall. they crowded in, standing

rather closer together than they would usually have done, peering about nervously.
  ?welcome to hogwarts,? said professor mcgonagall. ?the start-of-term banquet will begin shortly, but before you take your seats in the great hall, you will be sorted into your houses. the sorting is a very important ceremony because, while you are here, your house will be something like your family within hogwarts. you will have classes with the rest of your house, sleep in your house dormitory, and spend free time in your house common room.
  ?the four houses are called gryffindor, hufflepuff, ravenclaw, and slytherin. each house has its own noble history and each has produced outstanding witches and wizards. while you are at hog-warts, your triumphs will earn your house points, while any rule-breaking will lose house points. at the end of the year, the house with the most points is awarded the house cup, a great honor. i hope each of you will be a credit to whichever house becomes yours.
  ?the sorting ceremony will take place in a few minutes in front of the rest of the school. i suggest you all smarten yourselves up as much as you can while you are waiting.?
  her eyes lingered for a moment on neville?s cloak, which was fastened under his left ear, and on ron?s smudged nose. harry nervously tried to flatten his hair.
  ?i shall return when we are ready for you,? said professor mc-gonagall. ?please wait quietly.?
she left the chamber. harry swallowed.
?how exactly do they sort us into houses?? he asked ron.

  ?some sort of test, i think. fred said it hurts a lot, but i think he was joking.?
  harry?s heart gave a horrible jolt. a test? in front of the whole school? but he didn?t know any magic yet ? what on earth would he have to do? he hadn?t expected something like this the moment they arrived. he looked around anxiously and saw that everyone else looked terrified, too. no one was talking much except hermione granger, who was whispering very fast about all the spells she?d learned and wondering which one she?d need. harry tried hard not to listen to her. he?d never been more nervous, never, not even when he?d had to take a school report home to the dursleys saying that he?d somehow turned his teachers wig blue. he kept his eyes fixed on the door. any second now, professor mcgonagall would come back and lead him to his doom.
  then something happened that made him jump about a foot in the air ? several people behind him screamed.
?what the ? ??
  he gasped. so did the people around him. about twenty ghosts had just streamed through the back wall. pearly-white and slightly transparent, they glided across the room talking to one another and hardly glancing at the first years. they seemed to be arguing. what looked like a fat little monk was saying: ?forgive and forget, i say, we ought to give him a second chance ??
  ?my dear friar, haven?t we given peeves all the chances he de-serves? he gives us all a bad name and you know, he?s not really even a ghost ? i say, what are you all doing here??
  a ghost wearing a ruff and tights had suddenly noticed the first years.

nobody answered.
  ?new students!? said the fat friar, smiling around at them. ?about to be sorted, i suppose??
a few people nodded mutely.
  ?hope to see you in hufflepuff!? said the friar. ?my old house, you know.?
  ?move along now,? said a sharp voice. ?the sorting ceremony?s about to start.?
  professor mcgonagall had returned. one by one, the ghosts floated away through the opposite wall.
  ?now, form a line,? professor mcgonagall told the first years, ?and follow me.?
  feeling oddly as though his legs had turned to lead, harry got into line behind a boy with sandy hair, with ron behind him, and they walked out of the chamber, back across the hall, and through a pair of double doors into the great hall.
  harry had never even imagined such a strange and splendid place. it was lit by thousands and thousands of candles that were floating in midair over four long tables, where the rest of the students were sitting. these tables were laid with glittering golden plates and goblets. at the top of the hall was another long table where the teachers were sitting. professor mcgonagall led the first years up here, so that they came to a halt in a line facing the other students, with the teachers behind them. the hundreds of faces staring at them looked like pale lanterns in the flickering candle-light. dotted here and there among the students, the ghosts shone misty silver. mainly to avoid all the staring eyes, harry looked up-ward and saw a velvety black ceiling dotted with stars. he heard

hermione whisper, ?it?s bewitched to look like the sky outside. i read about it in hogwarts, a history.?
  it was hard to believe there was a ceiling there at all, and that the great hall didn?t simply open on to the heavens.
  harry quickly looked down again as professor mcgonagall silently placed a four-legged stool in front of the first years. on top of the stool she put a pointed wizard?s hat. this hat was patched and frayed and extremely dirty. aunt petunia wouldn?t have let it in the house.
  maybe they had to try and get a rabbit out of it, harry thought wildly, that seemed the sort of thing ? noticing that everyone in the hall was now staring at the hat, he stared at it, too. for a few seconds, there was complete silence. then the hat twitched. a rip near the brim opened wide like a mouth ? and the hat began to sing:
?oh, you may not think i?m pretty, but don?t judge on what you see, i?l eat myself if you can find
a smarter hat than me.
you can keep your bowlers black, your top hats sleek and tal,
for i?m the hogwarts sorting hat and i can cap them al.
there?s nothing hidden in your head the sorting hat can?t see,
so try me on and i wil tel you where you ought to be.

you might belong in gryfindor, where dwel the brave at heart, their daring, nerve, and chivalry set gryfindors apart;
you might belong in hufflepuf, where they are just and loyal, those pati ent huflepufs are true and unafraid of toil;
or yet in wise old ravenclaw, if you?ve a ready mind,
where those of wit and learning, wil always find their kind;
or perhaps in slytherin
you?l make your real friends, those cunning folk use any means to achieve their ends.
so put me on! don?t be afraid! and don?t get in a flap!
you?re in safe hands (though i have none) for i?m a thinking cap!?
the whole hall burst into applause as the hat finished its song. it bowed to each of the four tables and then became quite still again.
  ?so we?ve just got to try on the hat!? ron whispered to harry. ?i?ll kill fred, he was going on about wrestling a troll.?
  harry smiled weakly. yes, trying on the hat was a lot better than having to do a spell, but he did wish they could have tried it on without everyone watching. the hat seemed to be asking rather a

lot; harry didn?t feel brave or quick-witted or any of it at the moment. if only the hat had mentioned a house for people who felt a bit queasy, that would have been the one for him.
  professor mcgonagall now stepped forward holding a long roll of parchment.
  ?when i call your name, you will put on the hat and sit on the stool to be sorted,? she said. ?abbott, hannah!?
  a pink-faced girl with blonde pigtails stumbled out of line, put on the hat, which fell right down over her eyes, and sat down. a moment?s pause ?
?hufflepuff!? shouted the hat.
  the table on the right cheered and clapped as hannah went to sit down at the hufflepuff table. harry saw the ghost of the fat friar waving merrily at her.
?bones, susan!?
  ?hufflepuff!? shouted the hat again, and susan scuttled off to sit next to hannah.
?boot, terry!?
?ravenclaw!?
  the table second from the left clapped this time; several raven-claws stood up to shake hands with terry as he joined them.
  ?brocklehurst, mandy? went to ravenclaw too, but ?brown, lavender? became the first new gryffindor, and the table on the far left exploded with cheers; harry could see ron?s twin brothers cat-calling.
  ?bulstrode, millicent? then became a slytherin. perhaps it was harry?s imagination, after all he?d heard about slytherin, but he thought they looked like an unpleasant lot.

  he was starting to feel definitely sick now. he remembered being picked for teams during gym at his old school. he had always been last to be chosen, not because he was no good, but because no one wanted dudley to think they liked him.
?finch-fletchley, justin!?
?hufflepuff!?
  sometimes, harry noticed, the hat shouted out the house at once, but at others it took a little while to decide. ?finnigan, seamus,? the sandy-haired boy next to harry in the line, sat on the stool for almost a whole minute before the hat declared him a gryffindor.
?granger, hermione!?
  hermione almost ran to the stool and jammed the hat eagerly on her head.
?gryffindor!? shouted the hat. ron groaned.
  a horrible thought struck harry, as horrible thoughts always do when you?re very nervous. what if he wasn?t chosen at all? what if he just sat there with the hat over his eyes for ages, until professor mcgonagall jerked it off his head and said there had obviously been a mistake and he?d better get back on the train?
  when neville longbottom, the boy who kept losing his toad, was called, he fell over on his way to the stool. the hat took a long time to decide with neville. when it finally shouted, ?gryffindor,? neville ran off still wearing it, and had to jog back amid gales of laughter to give it to ?macdougal, morag.?
  malfoy swaggered forward when his name was called and got his wish at once: the hat had barely touched his head when it screamed, ?slytherin!?

  malfoy went to join his friends crabbe and goyle, looking pleased with himself.
there weren?t many people left now.
  ?moon? . . . , ?nott? . . . , ?parkinson? . . . , then a pair of twin girls, ?patil? and ?patil? . . . , then ?perks, sally-anne? . . . , and then, at last ?
?potter, harry!?
  as harry stepped forward, whispers suddenly broke out like little hissing fires all over the hall.
?potter, did she say??
?the harry potter??
  the last thing harry saw before the hat dropped over his eyes was the hall full of people craning to get a good look at him. next second he was looking at the black inside of the hat. he waited.
  ?hmm,? said a small voice in his ear. ?difficult. very difficult. plenty of courage, i see. not a bad mind either. there?s talent, oh my goodness, yes ? and a nice thirst to prove yourself, now that?s interesting. . . . so where shall i put you??
  harry gripped the edges of the stool and thought, not slytherin, not slytherin.
  ?not slytherin, eh?? said the small voice. ?are you sure? you could be great, you know, its all here in your head, and slytherin will help you on the way to greatness, no doubt about that ? no? well, if you?re sure ? better be gryffindor!?
  harry heard the hat shout the last word to the whole hall. he took off the hat and walked shakily toward the gryffindor table. he was so relieved to have been chosen and not put in slytherin, he hardly noticed that he was getting the loudest cheer yet. percy the

prefect got up and shook his hand vigorously, while the weasley twins yelled, ?we got potter! we got potter!? harry sat down opposite the ghost in the ruff he?d seen earlier. the ghost patted his arm, giving harry the sudden, horrible feeling he?d just plunged it into a bucket of ice-cold water.
  he could see the high table properly now. at the end nearest him sat hagrid, who caught his eye and gave him the thumbs up. harry grinned back. and there, in the center of the high table, in a large gold chair, sat albus dumbledore. harry recognized him at once from the card he?d gotten out of the chocolate frog on the train. dumbledore?s silver hair was the only thing in the whole hall that shone as brightly as the ghosts. harry spotted professor quirrell, too, the nervous young man from the leaky cauldron. he was looking very peculiar in a large purple turban.
  and now there were only four people left to be sorted. ?thomas, dean,? a black boy even taller than ron, joined harry at the gryffindor table. ?turpin, lisa,? became a ravenclaw and then it was ron?s turn. he was pale green by now. harry crossed his fingers under the table and a second later the hat had shouted, ?gryffindor!?
  harry clapped loudly with the rest as ron collapsed into the chair next to him.
  ?well done, ron, excellent,? said percy weasley pompously across harry as ?zabini, blaise,? was made a slytherin. professor mcgonagall rolled up her scroll and took the sorting hat away.
  harry looked down at his empty gold plate. he had only just realized how hungry he was. the pumpkin pasties seemed ages ago.

  albus dumbledore had gotten to his feet. he was beaming at the students, his arms opened wide, as if nothing could have pleased him more than to see them all there.
  ?welcome!? he said. ?welcome to a new year at hogwarts! be-fore we begin our banquet, i would like to say a few words. and here they are: nitwit! blubber! oddment! tweak!
?thank you!?
  he sat back down. everybody clapped and cheered. harry didn?t know whether to laugh or not.
?is he ? a bit mad?? he asked percy uncertainly.
  ?mad?? said percy airily. ?he?s a genius! best wizard in the world! but he is a bit mad, yes. potatoes, harry??
  harry?s mouth fell open. the dishes in front of him were now piled with food. he had never seen so many things he liked to eat on one table: roast beef, roast chicken, pork chops and lamb chops, sausages, bacon and steak, boiled potatoes, roast potatoes, fries, yorkshire pudding, peas, carrots, gravy, ketchup, and, for some strange reason, peppermint humbugs.
  the dursleys had never exactly starved harry, but he?d never been allowed to eat as much as he liked. dudley had always taken anything that harry really wanted, even if it made him sick. harry piled his plate with a bit of everything except the peppermints and began to eat. it was all delicious.
  ?that does look good,? said the ghost in the ruff sadly, watching harry cut up his steak.
?can?t you ? ??
?i haven?t eaten for nearly five hundred years,? said the ghost. ?i don?t need to, of course, but one does miss it. i don?t think i?ve in

troduced myself? sir nicholas de mimsy-porpington at your service. resident ghost of gryffindor tower.?
  ?i know who you are!? said ron suddenly. ?my brothers told me about you ? you?re nearly headless nick!?
  ?i would prefer you to call me sir nicholas de mimsy ?? the ghost began stiffly, but sandy-haired seamus finnigan interrupted. ?nearly headless? how can you be nearly headless??
  sir nicholas looked extremely miffed, as if their little chat wasn?t going at all the way he wanted.
  ?like this,? he said irritably. he seized his left ear and pulled. his whole head swung off his neck and fell onto his shoulder as if it was on a hinge. someone had obviously tried to behead him, but not done it properly. looking pleased at the stunned looks on their faces, nearly headless nick flipped his head back onto his neck, coughed, and said, ?so ? new gryffindors! i hope you?re going to help us win the house championship this year? gryffindors have never gone so long without winning. slytherins have got the cup six years in a row! the bloody baron?s becoming almost unbearable ? he?s the slytherin ghost.?
  harry looked over at the slytherin table and saw a horrible ghost sitting there, with blank staring eyes, a gaunt face, and robes stained with silver blood. he was right next to malfoy who, harry was pleased to see, didn?t look too pleased with the seating arrangements.
  ?how did he get covered in blood?? asked seamus with great interest.
?i?ve never asked,? said nearly headless nick delicately.
when everyone had eaten as much as they could, the remains of the food faded from the plates, leaving them sparkling clean as be

fore. a moment later the desserts appeared. blocks of ice cream in every flavor you could think of, apple pies, treacle tarts, chocolate ‚clairs and jam doughnuts, trifle, strawberries, jell-o, rice pudding . . .
  as harry helped himself to a treacle tart, the talk turned to their families.
  ?i?m half-and-half,? said seamus. ?me dad?s a muggle. mom didn?t tell him she was a witch ?til after they were married. bit of a nasty shock for him.?
the others laughed.
?what about you, neville?? said ron.
  ?well, my gran brought me up and she?s a witch,? said neville, ?but the family thought i was all-muggle for ages. my great uncle algie kept trying to catch me off my guard and force some magic out of me ? he pushed me off the end of blackpool pier once, i nearly drowned ? but nothing happened until i was eight. great uncle algie came round for dinner, and he was hanging me out of an upstairs window by the ankles when my great auntie enid offered him a meringue and he accidentally let go. but i bounced ? all the way down the garden and into the road. they were all really pleased, gran was crying, she was so happy. and you should have seen their faces when i got in here ? they thought i might not be magic enough to come, you see. great uncle algie was so pleased he bought me my toad.?
  on harry?s other side, percy weasley and hermione were talking about lessons (?i do hope they start right away, there?s so much to learn, i?m particularly interested in transfiguration, you know, turning something into something else, of course, it?s supposed to

be very difficult ??; ?you?ll be starting small, just matches into needles and that sort of thing ??).
  harry, who was starting to feel warm and sleepy, looked up at the high table again. hagrid was drinking deeply from his goblet. professor mcgonagall was talking to professor dumbledore. professor quirrell, in his absurd turban, was talking to a teacher with greasy black hair, a hooked nose, and sallow skin.
  it happened very suddenly. the hook-nosed teacher looked past quirrell?s turban straight into harry?s eyes ? and a sharp, hot pain shot across the scar on harry?s forehead.
?ouch!? harry clapped a hand to his head.
?what is it?? asked percy.
?n-nothing.?
  the pain had gone as quickly as it had come. harder to shake off was the feeling harry had gotten from the teachers look ? a feeling that he didn?t like harry at all.
  ?who?s that teacher talking to professor quirrell?? he asked percy.
  ?oh, you know quirrell already, do you? no wonder he?s looking so nervous, that?s professor snape. he teaches potions, but he doesn?t want to ? everyone knows he?s after quirrell?s job. knows an awful lot about the dark arts, snape.?
  harry watched snape for a while, but snape didn?t look at him again.
  at last, the desserts too disappeared, and professor dumbledore got to his feet again. the hall fell silent.
  ?ahem ? just a few more words now that we are all fed and watered. i have a few start-of-term notices to give you.

  ?first years should note that the forest on the grounds is forbid-den to all pupils. and a few of our older students would do well to remember that as well.?
  dumbledore?s twinkling eyes flashed in the direction of the weasley twins.
  ?i have also been asked by mr. filch, the caretaker, to remind you all that no magic should be used between classes in the corridors.
  ?quidditch trials will be held in the second week of the term. anyone interested in playing for their house teams should contact madam hooch.
  ?and finally, i must tell you that this year, the third-floor corridor on the right-hand side is out of bounds to everyone who does not wish to die a very painful death.?
harry laughed, but he was one of the few who did.
?he?s not serious?? he muttered to percy.
  ?must be,? said percy, frowning at dumbledore. ?it?s odd, because he usually gives us a reason why we?re not allowed to go somewhere ? the forest?s full of dangerous beasts, everyone knows that. i do think he might have told us prefects, at least.?
  ?and now, before we go to bed, let us sing the school song!? cried dumbledore. harry noticed that the other teachers? smiles had become rather fixed.
  dumbledore gave his wand a little flick, as if he was trying to get a fly off the end, and a long golden ribbon flew out of it, which rose high above the tables and twisted itself, snakelike, into words.
  ?everyone pick their favorite tune,? said dumbledore, ?and off we go!?

and the school bellowed:
?hogwarts, hogwarts, hoggy warty hogwarts,
teach us something please,
whether we be old and bald
or young with scabby knees,
our heads could do with filing with some interesting stuff,
for now they?re bare and ful of air, dead flies and bits of fluff,
so teach us things worth knowing, bring back what we?ve forgot, just do your best, we?l do the rest, and learn until our brains al rot.?
everybody finished the song at different times. at last, only the weasley twins were left singing along to a very slow funeral march. dumbledore conducted their last few lines with his wand and when they had finished, he was one of those who clapped loudest.
  ?ah, music,? he said, wiping his eyes. ?a magic beyond all we do here! and now, bedtime. off you trot!?
  the gryffindor first years followed percy through the chattering crowds, out of the great hall, and up the marble staircase. harry?s legs were like lead again, but only because he was so tired and full of food. he was too sleepy even to be surprised that the people in the portraits along the corridors whispered and pointed as they passed, or that twice percy led them through doorways hidden be-hind sliding panels and hanging tapestries. they climbed more

staircases, yawning and dragging their feet, and harry was just wondering how much farther they had to go when they came to a sudden halt.
  a bundle of walking sticks was floating in midair ahead of them, and as percy took a step toward them they started throwing them-selves at him.
  ?peeves,? percy whispered to the first years. ?a poltergeist.? he raised his voice, ?peeves ? show yourself.?
  a loud, rude sound, like the air being let out of a balloon, answered.
?do you want me to go to the bloody baron??
  there was a pop, and a little man with wicked, dark eyes and a wide mouth appeared, floating cross-legged in the air, clutching the walking sticks.
  ?oooooooh!? he said, with an evil cackle. ?ickle firsties! what fun!?
he swooped suddenly at them. they all ducked.
  ?go away, peeves, or the baron?ll hear about this, i mean it!? barked percy.
  peeves stuck out his tongue and vanished, dropping the walking sticks on neville?s head. they heard him zooming away, rattling coats of armor as he passed.
  ?you want to watch out for peeves,? said percy, as they set off again. ?the bloody baron?s the only one who can control him, he won?t even listen to us prefects. here we are.?
  at the very end of the corridor hung a portrait of a very fat woman in a pink silk dress.
?password?? she said.

  ?caput draconis,? said percy, and the portrait swung forward to reveal a round hole in the wall. they all scrambled through it ? neville needed a leg up ? and found themselves in the gryffindor common room, a cozy, round room full of squashy armchairs.
  percy directed the girls through one door to their dormitory and the boys through another. at the top of a spiral staircase ? they were obviously in one of the towers ? they found their beds at last: five four-posters hung with deep red, velvet curtains. their trunks had already been brought up. too tired to talk much, they pulled on their pajamas and fell into bed.
  ?great food, isn?t it?? ron muttered to harry through the hangings. ?get of, scabbers! he?s chewing my sheets.?
  harry was going to ask ron if he?d had any of the treacle tart, but he fell asleep almost at once.
  perhaps harry had eaten a bit too much, because he had a very strange dream. he was wearing professor quirrell?s turban, which kept talking to him, telling him he must transfer to slytherin at once, because it was his destiny. harry told the turban he didn?t want to be in slytherin; it got heavier and heavier; he tried to pull it off but it tightened painfully ? and there was malfoy, laughing at him as he struggled with it ? then malfoy turned into the hook-nosed teacher, snape, whose laugh became high and cold ? there was a burst of green light and harry woke, sweating and shaking.
  he rolled over and fell asleep again, and when he woke next day, he didn?t remember the dream at all.

c h a p t e r e i g h t

the potions master
t
 here, look.? ?where?? ?next to the tall kid with the red hair.?
?wearing the glasses??
?did you see his face??
?did you see his scar??
 whispers followed harry from the moment he left his dormitory the next day. people lining up outside classrooms stood on tip-toe to get a look at him, or doubled back to pass him in the corridors again, staring. harry wished they wouldn?t, because he was trying to concentrate on finding his way to classes.
  there were a hundred and forty-two staircases at hogwarts: wide, sweeping ones; narrow, rickety ones; some that led some-where different on a friday; some with a vanishing step halfway up that you had to remember to jump. then there were doors that

wouldn?t open unless you asked politely, or tickled them in exactly the right place, and doors that weren?t really doors at all, but solid walls just pretending. it was also very hard to remember where any-thing was, because it all seemed to move around a lot. the people in the portraits kept going to visit each other, and harry was sure the coats of armor could walk.
  the ghosts didn?t help, either. it was always a nasty shock when one of them glided suddenly through a door you were trying to open. nearly headless nick was always happy to point new gryffindors in the right direction, but peeves the poltergeist was worth two locked doors and a trick staircase if you met him when you were late for class. he would drop wastepaper baskets on your head, pull rugs from under your feet, pelt you with bits of chalk, or sneak up behind you, invisible, grab your nose, and screech, ?got your conk!?
  even worse than peeves, if that was possible, was the caretaker, argus filch. harry and ron managed to get on the wrong side of him on their very first morning. filch found them trying to force their way through a door that unluckily turned out to be the en-trance to the out-of-bounds corridor on the third floor. he wouldn?t believe they were lost, was sure they were trying to break into it on purpose, and was threatening to lock them in the dungeons when they were rescued by professor quirrell, who was passing.
  filch owned a cat called mrs. norris, a scrawny, dust-colored creature with bulging, lamplike eyes just like filch?s. she patrolled the corridors alone. break a rule in front of her, put just one toe out of line, and she?d whisk off for filch, who?d appear, wheezing, two

seconds later. filch knew the secret passageways of the school bet-ter than anyone (except perhaps the weasley twins) and could pop up as suddenly as any of the ghosts. the students all hated him, and it was the dearest ambition of many to give mrs. norris a good kick.
  and then, once you had managed to find them, there were the classes themselves. there was a lot more to magic, as harry quickly found out, than waving your wand and saying a few funny words.
  they had to study the night skies through their telescopes every wednesday at midnight and learn the names of different stars and the movements of the planets. three times a week they went out to the greenhouses behind the castle to study herbology, with a dumpy little witch called professor sprout, where they learned how to take care of all the strange plants and fungi, and found out what they were used for.
  easily the most boring class was history of magic, which was the only one taught by a ghost. professor binns had been very old indeed when he had fallen asleep in front of the staff room fire and got up next morning to teach, leaving his body behind him. binns droned on and on while they scribbled down names and dates, and got emeric the evil and uric the oddball mixed up.
  professor flitwick, the charms teacher, was a tiny little wizard who had to stand on a pile of books to see over his desk. at the start of their first class he took the roll call, and when he reached harry?s name he gave an excited squeak and toppled out of sight.
  professor mcgonagall was again different. harry had been quite right to think she wasn?t a teacher to cross. strict and clever, she gave them a talking-to the moment they sat down in her first class.

  ?transfiguration is some of the most complex and dangerous magic you will learn at hogwarts,? she said. ?anyone messing around in my class will leave and not come back. you have been warned.?
  then she changed her desk into a pig and back again. they were all very impressed and couldn?t wait to get started, but soon realized they weren?t going to be changing the furniture into animals for a long time. after taking a lot of complicated notes, they were each given a match and started trying to turn it into a needle. by the end of the lesson, only hermione granger had made any difference to her match; professor mcgonagall showed the class how it had gone all silver and pointy and gave hermione a rare smile.
  the class everyone had really been looking forward to was defense against the dark arts, but quirrell?s lessons turned out to be a bit of a joke. his classroom smelled strongly of garlic, which everyone said was to ward off a vampire he?d met in romania and was afraid would be coming back to get him one of these days. his turban, he told them, had been given to him by an african prince as a thank-you for getting rid of a troublesome zombie, but they weren?t sure they believed this story. for one thing, when seamus finnigan asked eagerly to hear how quirrell had fought off the zombie, quirrell went pink and started talking about the weather; for another, they had noticed that a funny smell hung around the turban, and the weasley twins insisted that it was stuffed full of garlic as well, so that quirrell was protected wherever he went.
  harry was very relieved to find out that he wasn?t miles behind everyone else. lots of people had come from muggle families and, like him, hadn?t had any idea that they were witches and wizards.

there was so much to learn that even people like ron didn?t have much of a head start.
  friday was an important day for harry and ron. they finally managed to find their way down to the great hall for breakfast without getting lost once.
  ?what have we got today?? harry asked ron as he poured sugar on his porridge.
  ?double potions with the slytherins,? said ron. ?snape?s head of slytherin house. they say he always favors them ? we?ll be able to see if it?s true.?
  ?wish mcgonagall favored us,? said harry. professor mcgonagall was head of gryffindor house, but it hadn?t stopped her from giving them a huge pile of homework the day before.
  just then, the mail arrived. harry had gotten used to this by now, but it had given him a bit of a shock on the first morning, when about a hundred owls had suddenly streamed into the great hall during breakfast, circling the tables until they saw their owners, and dropping letters and packages onto their laps.
  hedwig hadn?t brought harry anything so far. she sometimes flew in to nibble his ear and have a bit of toast before going off to sleep in the owlery with the other school owls. this morning, how-ever, she fluttered down between the marmalade and the sugar bowl and dropped a note onto harry?s plate. harry tore it open at once. it said, in a very untidy scrawl:
dear harry,
i know you get friday afternoons off so would you like to come and have a cup of tea with me around three?

i want to hear all about your first week. send us an answer back with hedwig.
hagrid
harry borrowed ron?s quill, scribbled yes, please, see you later on the back of the note, and sent hedwig off again.
  it was lucky that harry had tea with hagrid to look forward to, because the potions lesson turned out to be the worst thing that had happened to him so far.
  at the start-of-term banquet, harry had gotten the idea that professor snape disliked him. by the end of the first potions lesson, he knew he?d been wrong. snape didn?t dislike harry ? he hated him.
  potions lessons took place down in one of the dungeons. it was colder here than up in the main castle, and would have been quite creepy enough without the pickled animals floating in glass jars all around the walls.
  snape, like flitwick, started the class by taking the roll call, and like flitwick, he paused at harry?s name.
?ah, yes,? he said softly, ?harry potter. our new ? celebrity.?
  draco malfoy and his friends crabbe and goyle sniggered be-hind their hands. snape finished calling the names and looked up at the class. his eyes were black like hagrid?s, but they had none of hagrid?s warmth. they were cold and empty and made you think of dark tunnels.
  ?you are here to learn the subtle science and exact art of potion-making,? he began. he spoke in barely more than a whisper, but they caught every word ? like professor mcgonagall, snape had

the gift of keeping a class silent without effort. ?as there is little foolish wand-waving here, many of you will hardly believe this is magic. i don?t expect you will really understand the beauty of the softly simmering cauldron with its shimmering fumes, the delicate power of liquids that creep through human veins, bewitching the mind, ensnaring the senses. . . . i can teach you how to bottle fame, brew glory, even stopper death ? if you aren?t as big a bunch of dunderheads as i usually have to teach.?
  more silence followed this little speech. harry and ron ex-changed looks with raised eyebrows. hermione granger was on the edge of her seat and looked desperate to start proving that she wasn?t a dunderhead.
  ?potter!? said snape suddenly. ?what would i get if i added powdered root of asphodel to an infusion of wormwood??
  powdered root of what to an infusion of what? harry glanced at ron, who looked as stumped as he was; hermione?s hand had shot into the air.
?i don?t know, sir,? said harry.
snape?s lips curled into a sneer.
?tut, tut ? fame clearly isn?t everything.?
he ignored hermione?s hand.
  ?let?s try again. potter, where would you look if i told you to find me a bezoar??
  hermione stretched her hand as high into the air as it would go without her leaving her seat, but harry didn?t have the faintest idea what a bezoar was. he tried not to look at malfoy, crabbe, and goyle, who were shaking with laughter.
?i don?t know, sir.?

?thought you wouldn?t open a book before coming, eh, potter??
  harry forced himself to keep looking straight into those cold eyes. he had looked through his books at the dursleys?, but did snape expect him to remember everything in one thousand magical herbs and fungi?
snape was still ignoring hermione?s quivering hand.
  ?what is the difference, potter, between monkshood and wolfs-bane??
  at this, hermione stood up, her hand stretching toward the dungeon ceiling.
  ?i don?t know,? said harry quietly. ?i think hermione does, though, why don?t you try her??
  a few people laughed; harry caught seamus?s eye, and seamus winked. snape, however, was not pleased.
  ?sit down,? he snapped at hermione. ?for your information, potter, asphodel and wormwood make a sleeping potion so powerful it is known as the draught of living death. a bezoar is a stone taken from the stomach of a goat and it will save you from most poisons. as for monkshood and wolfsbane, they are the same plant, which also goes by the name of aconite. well? why aren?t you all copying that down??
  there was a sudden rummaging for quills and parchment. over the noise, snape said, ?and a point will be taken from gryffindor house for your cheek, potter.?
  things didn?t improve for the gryffindors as the potions lesson continued. snape put them all into pairs and set them to mixing up a simple potion to cure boils. he swept around in his long black cloak, watching them weigh dried nettles and crush snake fangs,

criticizing almost everyone except malfoy, whom he seemed to like. he was just telling everyone to look at the perfect way malfoy had stewed his horned slugs when clouds of acid green smoke and a loud hissing filled the dungeon. neville had somehow managed to melt seamus?s cauldron into a twisted blob, and their potion was seeping across the stone floor, burning holes in people?s shoes. within seconds, the whole class was standing on their stools while neville, who had been drenched in the potion when the cauldron collapsed, moaned in pain as angry red boils sprang up all over his arms and legs.
  ?idiot boy!? snarled snape, clearing the spilled potion away with one wave of his wand. ?i suppose you added the porcupine quills before taking the cauldron off the fire??
neville whimpered as boils started to pop up all over his nose.
  ?take him up to the hospital wing,? snape spat at seamus. then he rounded on harry and ron, who had been working next to neville.
  ?you ? potter ? why didn?t you tell him not to add the quills? thought he?d make you look good if he got it wrong, did you? that?s another point you?ve lost for gryffindor.?
  this was so unfair that harry opened his mouth to argue, but ron kicked him behind their cauldron.
  ?don?t push it,? he muttered, ?i?ve heard snape can turn very nasty.?
  as they climbed the steps out of the dungeon an hour later, harry?s mind was racing and his spirits were low. he?d lost two points for gryffindor in his very first week ? why did snape hate him so much?

  ?cheer up,? said ron, ?snape?s always taking points off fred and george. can i come and meet hagrid with you??
  at five to three they left the castle and made their way across the grounds. hagrid lived in a small wooden house on the edge of the forbidden forest. a crossbow and a pair of galoshes were outside the front door.
  when harry knocked they heard a frantic scrabbling from in-side and several booming barks. then hagrid?s voice rang out, saying, ?back, fang ? back.?
  hagrid?s big, hairy face appeared in the crack as he pulled the door open.
?hang on,? he said. ?back, fang.?
  he let them in, struggling to keep a hold on the collar of an enormous black boarhound.
  there was only one room inside. hams and pheasants were hanging from the ceiling, a copper kettle was boiling on the open fire, and in the corner stood a massive bed with a patchwork quilt over it.
  ?make yerselves at home,? said hagrid, letting go of fang, who bounded straight at ron and started licking his ears. like hagrid, fang was clearly not as fierce as he looked.
  ?this is ron,? harry told hagrid, who was pouring boiling water into a large teapot and putting rock cakes onto a plate.
?another weasley, eh?? said hagrid, glancing at ron?s freckles. ?i spent half me life chasin? yer twin brothers away from the forest.?
  the rock cakes were shapeless lumps with raisins that almost broke their teeth, but harry and ron pretended to be enjoying them as they told hagrid all about their first lessons. fang rested his head on harry?s knee and drooled all over his robes.

  harry and ron were delighted to hear hagrid call filch ?that old git??
  ?an? as fer that cat, mrs. norris, i?d like ter introduce her to fang sometime. d?yeh know, every time i go up ter the school, she follows me everywhere? can?t get rid of her ? filch puts her up
to it.
  harry told hagrid about snape?s lesson. hagrid, like ron, told harry not to worry about it, that snape liked hardly any of the students.
?but he seemed to really hate me.?
?rubbish!? said hagrid. ?why should he??
  yet harry couldn?t help thinking that hagrid didn?t quite meet his eyes when he said that.
  ?how?s yer brother charlie?? hagrid asked ron. ?i liked him a lot ? great with animals.?
  harry wondered if hagrid had changed the subject on purpose. while ron told hagrid all about charlie?s work with dragons, harry picked up a piece of paper that was lying on the table under the tea cozy. it was a cutting from the daily prophet:
gringotts break-in latest
investigations continue into the break-in at gringotts on 31 july, widely believed to be the work of dark wizards or witches unknown.
  gringotts goblins today insisted that nothing had been taken. the vault that was searched had in fact been emptied the same day.
?but we?re not telling you what was in there, so keep your noses out if you know what?s good

for you,? said a gringotts spokesgoblin this after-noon.
harry remembered ron telling him on the train that someone had tried to rob gringotts, but ron hadn?t mentioned the date.
  ?hagrid!? said harry, ?that gringotts break-in happened on my birthday! it might?ve been happening while we were there!?
  there was no doubt about it, hagrid definitely didn?t meet harry?s eyes this time. he grunted and offered him another rock cake. harry read the story again. the vault that was searched had in fact been emptied earlier that same day. hagrid had emptied vault seven hundred and thirteen, if you could call it emptying, taking out that grubby little package. had that been what the thieves were looking for?
  as harry and ron walked back to the castle for dinner, their pockets weighed down with rock cakes they?d been too polite to refuse, harry thought that none of the lessons he?d had so far had given him as much to think about as tea with hagrid. had hagrid collected that package just in time? where was it now? and did hagrid know something about snape that he didn?t want to tell harry?

c h a p t e r n i n e

the midnight duel
h
 arry had never believed he would meet a boy he hated more than dudley, but that was before he met draco malfoy. still, first-year gryffindors only had potions with the slytherins, so they didn?t have to put up with malfoy much. or at least, they didn?t until they spotted a notice pinned up in the gryffindor common room that made them all groan. flying lessons would be starting on thursday ? and gryffindor and slytherin would be learning together.
  ?typical,? said harry darkly. ?just what i always wanted. to make a fool of myself on a broomstick in front of malfoy.?
  he had been looking forward to learning to fly more than any-thing else.
  ?you don?t know that you?ll make a fool of yourself,? said ron reasonably. ?anyway, i know malfoy?s always going on about how good he is at quidditch, but i bet that?s all talk.?

  malfoy certainly did talk about flying a lot. he complained loudly about first years never getting on the house quidditch teams and told long, boastful stories that always seemed to end with him narrowly escaping muggles in helicopters. he wasn?t the only one, though: the way seamus finnigan told it, he?d spent most of his childhood zooming around the countryside on his broom-stick. even ron would tell anyone who?d listen about the time he?d almost hit a hang glider on charlie?s old broom. everyone from wizarding families talked about quidditch constantly. ron had al-ready had a big argument with dean thomas, who shared their dormitory, about soccer. ron couldn?t see what was exciting about a game with only one ball where no one was allowed to fly. harry had caught ron prodding dean?s poster of west ham soccer team, trying to make the players move.
  neville had never been on a broomstick in his life, because his grandmother had never let him near one. privately, harry felt she?d had good reason, because neville managed to have an extraordinary number of accidents even with both feet on the ground.
  hermione granger was almost as nervous about flying as neville was. this was something you couldn?t learn by heart out of a book ? not that she hadn?t tried. at breakfast on thursday she bored them all stupid with flying tips she?d gotten out of a library book called quidditch through the ages. neville was hanging on to her every word, desperate for anything that might help him hang on to his broomstick later, but everybody else was very pleased when hermione?s lecture was interrupted by the arrival of the mail.
harry hadn?t had a single letter since hagrid?s note, something that malfoy had been quick to notice, of course. malfoy?s eagle owl

was always bringing him packages of sweets from home, which he opened gloatingly at the slytherin table.
  a barn owl brought neville a small package from his grand-mother. he opened it excitedly and showed them a glass ball the size of a large marble, which seemed to be full of white smoke.
  ?it?s a remembrall!? he explained. ?gran knows i forget things ? this tells you if there?s something you?ve forgotten to do. look, you hold it tight like this and if it turns red ? oh . . .? his face fell, because the remembrall had suddenly glowed scarlet, ?. . . you?ve forgotten something . . .?
  neville was trying to remember what he?d forgotten when draco malfoy, who was passing the gryffindor table, snatched the rememb rall out of his hand.
  harry and ron jumped to their feet. they were half hoping for a reason to fight malfoy, but professor mcgonagall, who could spot trouble quicker than any teacher in the school, was there in a flash.
?what?s going on??
?malfoy?s got my remembrall, professor.?
  scowling, malfoy quickly dropped the remembrall back on the table.
  ?just looking,? he said, and he sloped away with crabbe and goyle behind him.
at three-thirty that afternoon, harry, ron, and the other gryffindors hurried down the front steps onto the grounds for their first flying lesson. it was a clear, breezy day, and the grass rippled under their feet as they marched down the sloping lawns toward a

smooth, flat lawn on the opposite side of the grounds to the for-bidden forest, whose trees were swaying darkly in the distance.
  the slytherins were already there, and so were twenty broom-sticks lying in neat lines on the ground. harry had heard fred and george weasley complain about the school brooms, saying that some of them started to vibrate if you flew too high, or always flew slightly to the left.
  their teacher, madam hooch, arrived. she had short, gray hair, and yellow eyes like a hawk.
  ?well, what are you all waiting for?? she barked. ?everyone stand by a broomstick. come on, hurry up.?
  harry glanced down at his broom. it was old and some of the twigs stuck out at odd angles.
  ?stick out your right hand over your broom,? called madam hooch at the front, ?and say ?up!? ?
?up!? everyone shouted.
  harry?s broom jumped into his hand at once, but it was one of the few that did. hermione granger?s had simply rolled over on the ground, and neville?s hadn?t moved at all. perhaps brooms, like horses, could tell when you were afraid, thought harry; there was a quaver in neville?s voice that said only too clearly that he wanted to keep his feet on the ground.
  madam hooch then showed them how to mount their brooms without sliding off the end, and walked up and down the rows correcting their grips. harry and ron were delighted when she told malfoy he?d been doing it wrong for years.
?now, when i blow my whistle, you kick off from the ground, hard,? said madam hooch. ?keep your brooms steady, rise a few

feet, and then come straight back down by leaning forward slightly. on my whistle ? three ? two ??
  but neville, nervous and jumpy and frightened of being left on the ground, pushed off hard before the whistle had touched madam hooch?s lips.
  ?come back, boy!? she shouted, but neville was rising straight up like a cork shot out of a bottle ? twelve feet ? twenty feet. harry saw his scared white face look down at the ground falling away, saw him gasp, slip sideways off the broom and ?
  wham ? a thud and a nasty crack and neville lay facedown on the grass in a heap. his broomstick was still rising higher and higher, and started to drift lazily toward the forbidden forest and out of sight.
  madam hooch was bending over neville, her face as white as his.
  ?broken wrist,? harry heard her mutter. ?come on, boy ? it?s all right, up you get.?
she turned to the rest of the class.
  ?none of you is to move while i take this boy to the hospital wing! you leave those brooms where they are or you?ll be out of hogwarts before you can say ?quidditch.? come on, dear.?
  neville, his face tear-streaked, clutching his wrist, hobbled off with madam hooch, who had her arm around him.
  no sooner were they out of earshot than malfoy burst into laughter.
?did you see his face, the great lump??
the other slytherins joined in.
?shut up, malfoy,? snapped parvati patil.

  ?ooh, sticking up for longbottom?? said pansy parkinson, a hard-faced slytherin girl. ?never thought you?d like fat little cry-babies, parvati.?
 ?look!? said malfoy, darting forward and snatching something out of the grass. ?it?s that stupid thing longbottom?s gran sent him.? the remembrall glittered in the sun as he held it up.
  ?give that here, malfoy,? said harry quietly. everyone stopped talking to watch.
malfoy smiled nastily.
  ?i think i?ll leave it somewhere for longbottom to find ? how about ? up a tree??
  ?give it here!? harry yelled, but malfoy had leapt onto his broomstick and taken off. he hadn?t been lying, he could fly well. hovering level with the topmost branches of an oak he called, ?come and get it, potter!?
harry grabbed his broom.
  ?no!? shouted hermione granger. ?madam hooch told us not to move ? you?ll get us all into trouble.?
  harry ignored her. blood was pounding in his ears. he mounted the broom and kicked hard against the ground and up, up he soared; air rushed through his hair, and his robes whipped out be-hind him ? and in a rush of fierce joy he realized he?d found something he could do without being taught ? this was easy, this was wonderful. he pulled his broomstick up a little to take it even higher, and heard screams and gasps of girls back on the ground and an admiring whoop from ron.
  he turned his broomstick sharply to face malfoy in midair. malfoy looked stunned.

?give it here,? harry called, ?or i?ll knock you off that broom!?
?oh, yeah?? said malfoy, trying to sneer, but looking worried.
  harry knew, somehow, what to do. he leaned forward and grasped the broom tightly in both hands, and it shot toward malfoy like a javelin. malfoy only just got out of the way in time; harry made a sharp about-face and held the broom steady. a few people below were clapping.
  ?no crabbe and goyle up here to save your neck, malfoy,? harry called.
the same thought seemed to have struck malfoy.
  ?catch it if you can, then!? he shouted, and he threw the glass ball high into the air and streaked back toward the ground.
  harry saw, as though in slow motion, the ball rise up in the air and then start to fall. he leaned forward and pointed his broom handle down ? next second he was gathering speed in a steep dive, racing the ball ? wind whistled in his ears, mingled with the screams of people watching ? he stretched out his hand ? a foot from the ground he caught it, just in time to pull his broom straight, and he toppled gently onto the grass with the remembrall clutched safely in his fist.
?harry potter!?
  his heart sank faster than he?d just dived. professor mcgonagall was running toward them. he got to his feet, trembling. ?never ? in all my time at hogwarts ??
  professor mcgonagall was almost speechless with shock, and her glasses flashed furiously, ?? how dare you ? might have broken your neck ??
?it wasn?t his fault, professor ??

?be quiet, miss patil ??
?but malfoy ??
?that?s enough, mr. weasley. potter, follow me, now.?
  harry caught sight of malfoy, crabbe, and goyle?s triumphant faces as he left, walking numbly in professor mcgonagall?s wake as she strode toward the castle. he was going to be expelled, he just knew it. he wanted to say something to defend himself, but there seemed to be something wrong with his voice. professor mcgonagall was sweeping along without even looking at him; he had to jog to keep up. now he?d done it. he hadn?t even lasted two weeks. he?d be packing his bags in ten minutes. what would the dursleys say when he turned up on the doorstep?
  up the front steps, up the marble staircase inside, and still professor mcgonagall didn?t say a word to him. she wrenched open doors and marched along corridors with harry trotting miserably behind her. maybe she was taking him to dumbledore. he thought of hagrid, expelled but allowed to stay on as gamekeeper. perhaps he could be hagrid?s assistant. his stomach twisted as he imagined it, watching ron and the others becoming wizards while he stumped around the grounds carrying hagrid?s bag.
  professor mcgonagall stopped outside a classroom. she opened the door and poked her head inside.
  ?excuse me, professor flitwick, could i borrow wood for a moment??
  wood? thought harry, bewildered; was wood a cane she was going to use on him?
  but wood turned out to be a person, a burly fifth-year boy who came out of flitwick?s class looking confused.

 ?follow me, you two,? said professor mcgonagall, and they marched on up the corridor, wood looking curiously at harry. ?in here.?
  professor mcgonagall pointed them into a classroom that was empty except for peeves, who was busy writing rude words on the blackboard.
  ?out, peeves!? she barked. peeves threw the chalk into a bin, which clanged loudly, and he swooped out cursing. professor mcgonagall slammed the door behind him and turned to face the two boys.
?potter, this is oliver wood. wood ? i?ve found you a seeker.? wood?s expression changed from puzzlement to delight. ?are you serious, professor??
  ?absolutely,? said professor mcgonagall crisply. ?the boy?s a natural. i?ve never seen anything like it. was that your first time on a broomstick, potter??
  harry nodded silently. he didn?t have a clue what was going on, but he didn?t seem to be being expelled, and some of the feeling started coming back to his legs.
  ?he caught that thing in his hand after a fifty-foot dive,? professor mcgonagall told wood. ?didn?t even scratch himself. charlie weasley couldn?t have done it.?
  wood was now looking as though all his dreams had come true at once.
 ?ever seen a game of quidditch, potter?? he asked excitedly. ?wood?s captain of the gryffindor team,? professor mcgonagall explained.
?he?s just the build for a seeker, too,? said wood, now walking

around harry and staring at him. ?light ? speedy ? we?ll have to get him a decent broom, professor ? a nimbus two thousand or a cleansweep seven, i?d say.?
  ?i shall speak to professor dumbledore and see if we can?t bend the first-year rule. heaven knows, we need a better team than last year. flattened in that last match by slytherin, i couldn?t look severus snape in the face for weeks. . . .?
 professor mcgonagall peered sternly over her glasses at harry. ?i want to hear you?re training hard, potter, or i may change my mind about punishing you.?
then she suddenly smiled.
  ?your father would have been proud,? she said. ?he was an excellent quidditch player himself.?
?you?re joking.?
  it was dinnertime. harry had just finished telling ron what had happened when he?d left the grounds with professor mcgonagall. ron had a piece of steak and kidney pie halfway to his mouth, but he?d forgotten all about it.
  ?seeker?? he said. ?but first years never ? you must be the youngest house player in about ??
  ?? a century,? said harry, shoveling pie into his mouth. he felt particularly hungry after the excitement of the afternoon. ?wood told me.?
 ron was so amazed, so impressed, he just sat and gaped at harry. ?i start training next week,? said harry. ?only don?t tell anyone, wood wants to keep it a secret.?
  fred and george weasley now came into the hall, spotted harry, and hurried over.

  ?well done,? said george in a low voice. ?wood told us. we?re on the team too ? beaters.?
  ?i tell you, we?re going to win that quidditch cup for sure this year,? said fred. ?we haven?t won since charlie left, but this year?s team is going to be brilliant. you must be good, harry, wood was almost skipping when he told us.?
  ?anyway, we?ve got to go, lee jordan reckons he?s found a new secret passageway out of the school.?
  ?bet it?s that one behind the statue of gregory the smarmy that we found in our first week. see you.?
  fred and george had hardly disappeared when someone far less welcome turned up: malfoy, flanked by crabbe and goyle.
  ?having a last meal, potter? when are you getting the train back to the muggles??
  ?you?re a lot braver now that you?re back on the ground and you?ve got your little friends with you,? said harry coolly. there was of course nothing at all little about crabbe and goyle, but as the high table was full of teachers, neither of them could do more than crack their knuckles and scowl.
  ?i ?d take you on anytime on my own, ? said malfoy. ?tonight, if you want. wizard?s duel. wands only ? no contact. what?s the matter? never heard of a wizards duel before, i suppose??
  ?of course he has,? said ron, wheeling around. ?i?m his second, who?s yours??
malfoy looked at crabbe and goyle, sizing them up.
  ?crabbe,? he said. ?midnight all right? we?ll meet you in the trophy room; that?s always unlocked.?
  when malfoy had gone, ron and harry looked at each other.

  ?what is a wizards duel?? said harry. ?and what do you mean, you?re my second??
  ?well, a second?s there to take over if you die,? said ron casually, getting started at last on his cold pie. catching the look on harry?s face, he added quickly, ?but people only die in proper duels, you know, with real wizards. the most you and malfoy?ll be able to do is send sparks at each other. neither of you knows enough magic to do any real damage. i bet he expected you to refuse, anyway.?
?and what if i wave my wand and nothing happens??
?throw it away and punch him on the nose,? ron suggested. ?excuse me.
they both looked up. it was hermione granger.
?can?t a person eat in peace in this place?? said ron.
hermione ignored him and spoke to harry.
  ?i couldn?t help overhearing what you and malfoy were saying ??
?bet you could,? ron muttered.
  ?? and you mustn?t go wandering around the school at night, think of the points you?ll lose gryffindor if you?re caught, and you?re bound to be. it?s really very selfish of you.?
?and it?s really none of your business,? said harry.
?good-bye,? said ron.
all the same, it wasn?t what you?d call the perfect end to the day, harry thought, as he lay awake much later listening to dean and seamus falling asleep (neville wasn?t back from the hospital wing). ron had spent all evening giving him advice such as ?if he tries to curse you, you?d better dodge it, because i can?t remember how to

block them.? there was a very good chance they were going to get caught by filch or mrs. norris, and harry felt he was pushing his luck, breaking another school rule today. on the other hand, malfoy?s sneering face kept looming up out of the darkness ? this was his big chance to beat malfoy face-to-face. he couldn?t miss it.
?half-past eleven,? ron muttered at last, ?we?d better go.?
  they pulled on their bathrobes, picked up their wands, and crept across the tower room, down the spiral staircase, and into the gryffindor common room. a few embers were still glowing in the fireplace, turning all the armchairs into hunched black shadows. they had almost reached the portrait hole when a voice spoke from the chair nearest them, ?i can?t believe you?re going to do this, harry.?
  a lamp flickered on. it was hermione granger, wearing a pink bathrobe and a frown.
?you!? said ron furiously. ?go back to bed!?
  ?i almost told your brother,? hermione snapped, ?percy ? he?s a prefect, he?d put a stop to this.?
harry couldn?t believe anyone could be so interfering.
  ?come on,? he said to ron. he pushed open the portrait of the fat lady and climbed through the hole.
  hermione wasn?t going to give up that easily. she followed ron through the portrait hole, hissing at them like an angry goose.
  ?don?t you care about gryffindor, do you only care about your-selves, i don?t want slytherin to win the house cup, and you?ll lose all the points i got from professor mcgonagall for knowing about switching spells.?
?go away.?

  ?all right, but i warned you, you just remember what i said when you?re on the train home tomorrow, you?re so ??
  but what they were, they didn?t find out. hermione had turned to the portrait of the fat lady to get back inside and found herself facing an empty painting. the fat lady had gone on a nighttime visit and hermione was locked out of gryffindor tower.
?now what am i going to do?? she asked shrilly.
  ?that?s your problem,? said ron. ?we?ve got to go, we?re going to be late.?
  they hadn?t even reached the end of the corridor when hermione caught up with them.
?i ?m coming with you, ? she said.
?you are not.?
  ?d?you think i?m going to stand out here and wait for filch to catch me? if he finds all three of us i?ll tell him the truth, that i was trying to stop you, and you can back me up.?
?you?ve got some nerve ?? said ron loudly.
?shut up, both of you!? said harry sharply. ?i heard something.? it was a sort of snuffling.
?mrs. norris?? breathed ron, squinting through the dark.
it wasn?t mrs. norris. it was neville. he was curled up on the
floor, fast asleep, but jerked suddenly awake as they crept nearer. ?thank goodness you found me! i?ve been out here for hours, i
couldn?t remember the new password to get in to bed.?
 ?keep your voice down, neville. the password?s ?pig snout? but it won?t help you now, the fat lady?s gone off somewhere.? ?how?s your arm?? said harry.
  ?fine,? said neville, showing them. ?madam pomfrey mended it in about a minute.?

  ?good ? well, look, neville, we?ve got to be somewhere, we?ll see you later ??
  ?don?t leave me!? said neville, scrambling to his feet, ?i don?t want to stay here alone, the bloody baron?s been past twice al-ready.?
  ron looked at his watch and then glared furiously at hermione and neville.
  ?if either of you get us caught, i?ll never rest until i?ve learned that curse of the bogies quirrell told us about, and used it on you.
  hermione opened her mouth, perhaps to tell ron exactly how to use the curse of the bogies, but harry hissed at her to be quiet and beckoned them all forward.
  they flitted along corridors striped with bars of moonlight from the high windows. at every turn harry expected to run into filch or mrs. norris, but they were lucky. they sped up a staircase to the third floor and tiptoed toward the trophy room.
  malfoy and crabbe weren?t there yet. the crystal trophy cases glimmered where the moonlight caught them. cups, shields, plates, and statues winked silver and gold in the darkness. they edged along the walls, keeping their eyes on the doors at either end of the room. harry took out his wand in case malfoy leapt in and started at once. the minutes crept by.
?he?s late, maybe he?s chickened out,? ron whispered.
  then a noise in the next room made them jump. harry had only just raised his wand when they heard someone speak ? and it wasn?t malfoy.
?sniff around, my sweet, they might be lurking in a corner.?
it was filch speaking to mrs. norris. horror-struck, harry

waved madly at the other three to follow him as quickly as possible; they scurried silently toward the door, away from filch?s voice. neville?s robes had barely whipped round the corner when they heard filch enter the trophy room.
  ?they?re in here somewhere,? they heard him mutter, ?probably hiding.?
  ?this way!? harry mouthed to the others and, petrified, they began to creep down a long gallery full of suits of armor. they could hear filch getting nearer. neville suddenly let out a frightened squeak and broke into a run ? he tripped, grabbed ron around the waist, and the pair of them toppled right into a suit of armor.
  the clanging and crashing were enough to wake the whole castle.
  ?run!? harry yelled, and the four of them sprinted down the gallery, not looking back to see whether filch was following ? they swung around the doorpost and galloped down one corridor then another, harry in the lead, without any idea where they were or where they were going ? they ripped through a tapestry and found themselves in a hidden passageway, hurtled along it and came out near their charms classroom, which they knew was miles from the trophy room.
  ?i think we?ve lost him,? harry panted, leaning against the cold wall and wiping his forehead. neville was bent double, wheezing and spluttering.
  ?i ? told ? you,? hermione gasped, clutching at the stitch in her chest, ?i ? told ? you.?
  ?we?ve got to get back to gryffindor tower,? said ron, ?quickly as possible.?

  ?malfoy tricked you,? hermione said to harry. ?you realize that, don?t you? he was never going to meet you ? filch knew someone was going to be in the trophy room, malfoy must have tipped him off.?
  harry thought she was probably right, but he wasn?t going to tell her that.
?let?s go.?
  it wasn?t going to be that simple. they hadn?t gone more than a dozen paces when a doorknob rattled and something came shooting out of a classroom in front of them.
  it was peeves. he caught sight of them and gave a squeal of de-light.
?shut up, peeves ? please ? you?ll get us thrown out.? peeves cackled.
  ?wandering around at midnight, ickle firsties? tut, tut, tut. naughty, naughty, you?ll get caughty.?
?not if you don?t give us away, peeves, please.?
  ?should tell filch, i should,? said peeves in a sanity voice, but his eyes glittered wickedly. ?it?s for your own good, you know.?
  ?get out of the way,? snapped ron, taking a swipe at peeves ? this was a big mistake.
  ?students out of bed!? peeves bellowed, ?students out of bed down the charms corridor!?
  ducking under peeves, they ran for their lives, right to the end of the corridor where they slammed into a door ? and it was locked.
  ?this is it!? ron moaned, as they pushed helplessly at the door, ?we?re done for! this is the end!?

  they could hear footsteps, filch running as fast as he could toward peeves?s shouts.
  ?oh, move over,? hermione snarled. she grabbed harry?s wand, tapped the lock, and whispered, ?alohomora!?
  the lock clicked and the door swung open ? they piled through it, shut it quickly, and pressed their ears against it, listening.
  ?which way did they go, peeves?? filch was saying. ?quick, tell me.?
?say ?please.? ?
?don?t mess with me, peeves, now where did they go??
  ?shan?t say nothing if you don?t say please,? said peeves in his annoying singsong voice.
?all right ? please.?
  ?nothing! ha haaa! told you i wouldn?t say nothing if you didn?t say please! ha ha! haaaaaa!? and they heard the sound of peeves whooshing away and filch cursing in rage.
  ?he thinks this door is locked,? harry whispered. ?i think we?ll be okay ? get of, neville!? for neville had been tugging on the sleeve of harry?s bathrobe for the last minute. ?what??
  harry turned around ? and saw, quite clearly, what. for a moment, he was sure he?d walked into a nightmare ? this was too much, on top of everything that had happened so far.
  they weren?t in a room, as he had supposed. they were in a corridor. the forbidden corridor on the third floor. and now they knew why it was forbidden.
  they were looking straight into the eyes of a monstrous dog, a dog that filled the whole space between ceiling and floor. it had three heads. three pairs of rolling, mad eyes; three noses, twitching

and quivering in their direction; three drooling mouths, saliva hanging in slippery ropes from yellowish fangs.
  it was standing quite still, all six eyes staring at them, and harry knew that the only reason they weren?t already dead was that their sudden appearance had taken it by surprise, but it was quickly getting over that, there was no mistaking what those thunderous growls meant.
  harry groped for the doorknob ? between filch and death, he?d take filch.
  they fell backward ? harry slammed the door shut, and they ran, they almost flew, back down the corridor. filch must have hurried off to look for them somewhere else, because they didn?t see him anywhere, but they hardly cared ? all they wanted to do was put as much space as possible between them and that monster. they didn?t stop running until they reached the portrait of the fat lady on the seventh floor.
?where on earth have you all been?? she asked, looking at their bathrobes hanging off their shoulders and their flushed, sweaty faces.
  ?never mind that ? pig snout, pig snout,? panted harry, and the portrait swung forward. they scrambled into the common room and collapsed, trembling, into armchairs.
  it was a while before any of them said anything. neville, indeed, looked as if he?d never speak again.
  ?what do they think they?re doing, keeping a thing like that locked up in a school?? said ron finally. ?if any dog needs exercise, that one does.?
  hermione had got both her breath and her bad temper back again.

  ?you don?t use your eyes, any of you, do you?? she snapped. ?didn?t you see what it was standing on??
  ?the floor?? harry suggested. ?i wasn?t looking at its feet, i was too busy with its heads.?
  ?no, not the floor. it was standing on a trapdoor. it?s obviously guarding something.?
she stood up, glaring at them.
  ?i hope you?re pleased with yourselves. we could all have been killed ? or worse, expelled. now, if you don?t mind, i?m going to bed.?
ron stared after her, his mouth open.
  ?no, we don?t mind,? he said. ?you?d think we dragged her along, wouldn?t you??
  but hermione had given harry something else to think about as he climbed back into bed. the dog was guarding something. . . . what had hagrid said? gringotts was the safest place in the world for something you wanted to hide ? except perhaps hog-warts.
  it looked as though harry had found out where the grubby little package from vault seven hundred and thirteen was.

c h a p t e r t e n

halloween
m
 alfoy couldn?t believe his eyes when he saw that harry and ron were still at hogwarts the next day, looking tired but perfectly cheerful. indeed, by the next morning harry and ron thought that meeting the three-headed dog had been an excellent adventure, and they were quite keen to have another one. in the meantime, harry filled ron in about the package that seemed to have been moved from gringotts to hogwarts, and they spent a lot of time wondering what could possibly need such heavy protection.
?it?s either really valuable or really dangerous,? said ron. ?or both,? said harry.
  but as all they knew for sure about the mysterious object was that it was about two inches long, they didn?t have much chance of guessing what it was without further clues.
neither neville nor hermione showed the slightest interest in

what lay underneath the dog and the trapdoor. all neville cared about was never going near the dog again.
  hermione was now refusing to speak to harry and ron, but she was such a bossy know-it-all that they saw this as an added bonus. all they really wanted now was a way of getting back at malfoy, and to their great delight, just such a thing arrived in the mail about a week later.
  as the owls flooded into the great hall as usual, everyone?s attention was caught at once by a long, thin package carried by six large screech owls. harry was just as interested as everyone else to see what was in this large parcel, and was amazed when the owls soared down and dropped it right in front of him, knocking his bacon to the floor. they had hardly fluttered out of the way when an-other owl dropped a letter on top of the parcel.
  harry ripped open the letter first, which was lucky, because it said:
do not open the parcel at the table.
it contains your new nimbus two thousand, but i don?t want everybody knowing you?ve got a broomstick or they?ll all want one. oliver wood will meet you tonight on the quidditch field at seven o?clock for your first training session.

harry had difficulty hiding his glee as he handed the note to ron to read.

  ?a nimbus two thousand!? ron moaned enviously. ?i?ve never even touched one.?
  they left the hall quickly, wanting to unwrap the broomstick in private before their first class, but halfway across the entrance hall they found the way upstairs barred by crabbe and goyle. malfoy seized the package from harry and felt it.
  ?that?s a broomstick,? he said, throwing it back to harry with a mixture of jealousy and spite on his face. ?you?ll be in for it this time, potter, first years aren?t allowed them.?
ron couldn?t resist it.
  ?it?s not any old broomstick,? he said, ?it?s a nimbus two thou-sand. what did you say you?ve got at home, malfoy, a comet two sixty?? ron grinned at harry. ?comets look flashy, but they?re not in the same league as the nimbus.?
  ?what would you know about it, weasley, you couldn?t afford half the handle,? malfoy snapped back. ?i suppose you and your brothers have to save up twig by twig.?
  before ron could answer, professor flitwick appeared at malfoy?s elbow.
?not arguing, i hope, boys?? he squeaked.
?potters been sent a broomstick, professor,? said malfoy quickly.
  ?yes, yes, that?s right,? said professor flitwick, beaming at harry. ?professor mcgonagall told me all about the special circumstances, potter. and what model is it??
  ?a nimbus two thousand, sir,? said harry, fighting not to laugh at the look of horror on malfoy?s face. ?and it?s really thanks to malfoy here that i?ve got it,? he added.
  harry and ron headed upstairs, smothering their laughter at malfoy?s obvious rage and confusion.

  ?well, it?s true,? harry chortled as they reached the top of the marble staircase, ?if he hadn?t stolen neville?s remembrall i wouldn?t be on the team. . . .?
  ?so i suppose you think that?s a reward for breaking rules?? came an angry voice from just behind them. hermione was stomping up the stairs, looking disapprovingly at the package in harry?s hand.
?i thought you weren?t speaking to us?? said harry.
?yes, don?t stop now,? said ron, ?its doing us so much good.? hermione marched away with her nose in the air.
  harry had a lot of trouble keeping his mind on his lessons that day. it kept wandering up to the dormitory where his new broom-stick was lying under his bed, or straying off to the quidditch field where he?d be learning to play that night. he bolted his dinner that evening without noticing what he was eating, and then rushed upstairs with ron to unwrap the nimbus two thousand at last.
  ?wow,? ron sighed, as the broomstick rolled onto harry?s bed-spread.
  even harry, who knew nothing about the different brooms, thought it looked wonderful. sleek and shiny, with a mahogany handle, it had a long tail of neat, straight twigs and nimbus two thousand written in gold near the top.
  as seven o?clock drew nearer, harry left the castle and set off in the dusk toward the quidditch field. he?d never been inside the stadium before. hundreds of seats were raised in stands around the field so that the spectators were high enough to see what was going on. at either end of the field were three golden poles with hoops on the end. they reminded harry of the little plastic sticks muggle

children blew bubbles through, except that they were fifty feet high.
  too eager to fly again to wait for wood, harry mounted his broomstick and kicked off from the ground. what a feeling ? he swooped in and out of the goal posts and then sped up and down the field. the nimbus two thousand turned wherever he wanted at his lightest touch.
?hey, potter, come down!?
  oliver wood had arrived. he was carrying a large wooden crate under his arm. harry landed next to him.
  ?very nice,? said wood, his eyes glinting. ?i see what mcgonagall meant . . . you really are a natural. i?m just going to teach you the rules this evening, then you?ll be joining team practice three times a week.?
he opened the crate. inside were four different-sized balls.
  ?right,? said wood. ?now, quidditch is easy enough to under-stand, even if it?s not too easy to play. there are seven players on each side. three of them are called chasers.?
  ?three chasers,? harry repeated, as wood took out a bright red ball about the size of a soccer ball.
  ?this ball?s called the quaffle,? said wood. ?the chasers throw the quaffle to each other and try and get it through one of the hoops to score a goal. ten points every time the quaffle goes through one of the hoops. follow me??
  ?the chasers throw the quaffle and put it through the hoops to score,? harry recited. ?so ? that?s sort of like basketball on broomsticks with six hoops, isn?t it??
?what?s basketball?? said wood curiously.

?never mind,? said harry quickly.
  ?now, there?s another player on each side who?s called the keeper ? i?m keeper for gryffindor. i have to fly around our hoops and stop the other team from scoring.?
  ?three chasers, one keeper,? said harry, who was determined to remember it all. ?and they play with the quaffle. okay, got that. so what are they for?? he pointed at the three balls left inside the box.
?i?ll show you now,? said wood. ?take this.?
 he handed harry a small club, a bit like a short baseball bat. ?i?m going to show you what the bludgers do,? wood said. ?these two are the bludgers.?
  he showed harry two identical balls, jet black and slightly smaller than the red quaffle. harry noticed that they seemed to be straining to escape the straps holding them inside the box.
  ?stand back,? wood warned harry. he bent down and freed one of the bludgers.
  at once, the black ball rose high in the air and then pelted straight at harry?s face. harry swung at it with the bat to stop it from breaking his nose, and sent it zigzagging away into the air ? it zoomed around their heads and then shot at wood, who dived on top of it and managed to pin it to the ground.
  ?see?? wood panted, forcing the struggling bludger back into the crate and strapping it down safely. ?the bludgers rocket around, trying to knock players off their brooms. that?s why you have two beaters on each team ? the weasley twins are ours ? it?s their job to protect their side from the bludgers and try and knock them toward the other team. so ? think you?ve got all that??

  ?three chasers try and score with the quaffle; the keeper guards the goal posts; the beaters keep the bludgers away from their team,? harry reeled off.
?very good,? said wood.
  ?er ? have the bludgers ever killed anyone?? harry asked, hoping he sounded offhand.
  ?never at hogwarts. we?ve had a couple of broken jaws but nothing worse than that. now, the last member of the team is the seeker. that?s you. and you don?t have to worry about the quaffle or the bludgers ??
?? unless they crack my head open.?
  ?don?t worry, the weasleys are more than a match for the bludgers ? i mean, they?re like a pair of human bludgers them-selves.?
  wood reached into the crate and took out the fourth and last ball. compared with the quaffle and the bludgers, it was tiny, about the size of a large walnut. it was bright gold and had little fluttering silver wings.
  ?this,? said wood, ?is the golden snitch, and it?s the most important ball of the lot. it?s very hard to catch because it?s so fast and difficult to see. it?s the seeker?s job to catch it. you?ve got to weave in and out of the chasers, beaters, bludgers, and quaffle to get it before the other team?s seeker, because whichever seeker catches the snitch wins his team an extra hundred and fifty points, so they nearly always win. that?s why seekers get fouled so much. a game of quidditch only ends when the snitch is caught, so it can go on for ages ? i think the record is three months, they had to keep bringing on substitutes so the players could get some sleep.

?well, that?s it ? any questions??
  harry shook his head. he understood what he had to do all right, it was doing it that was going to be the problem.
  ?we won?t practice with the snitch yet,? said wood, carefully shutting it back inside the crate, ?it?s too dark, we might lose it. let?s try you out with a few of these.?
  he pulled a bag of ordinary golf balls out of his pocket and a few minutes later, he and harry were up in the air, wood throwing the golf balls as hard as he could in every direction for harry to catch.
  harry didn?t miss a single one, and wood was delighted. after half an hour, night had really fallen and they couldn?t carry on.
  ?that quidditch cup?ll have our name on it this year,? said wood happily as they trudged back up to the castle. ?i wouldn?t be surprised if you turn out better than charlie weasley, and he could have played for england if he hadn?t gone off chasing dragons.?
perhaps it was because he was now so busy, what with quidditch practice three evenings a week on top of all his homework, but harry could hardly believe it when he realized that he?d already been at hogwarts two months. the castle felt more like home than privet drive ever had. his lessons, too, were becoming more and more interesting now that they had mastered the basics.
  on halloween morning they woke to the delicious smell of baking pumpkin wafting through the corridors. even better, professor flitwick announced in charms that he thought they were ready to start making objects fly, something they had all been dying to try since they?d seen him make neville?s toad zoom around the class-room. professor flitwick put the class into pairs to practice. harry?s

partner was seamus finnigan (which was a relief, because neville had been trying to catch his eye). ron, however, was to be working with hermione granger. it was hard to tell whether ron or hermione was angrier about this. she hadn?t spoken to either of them since the day harry?s broomstick had arrived.
  ?now, don?t forget that nice wrist movement we?ve been practicing!? squeaked professor flitwick, perched on top of his pile of books as usual. ?swish and flick, remember, swish and flick. and saying the magic words properly is very important, too ? never forget wizard baruffio, who said ?s? instead of ?f? and found himself on the floor with a buffalo on his chest.?
  it was very difficult. harry and seamus swished and flicked, but the feather they were supposed to be sending skyward just lay on the desktop. seamus got so impatient that he prodded it with his wand and set fire to it ? harry had to put it out with his hat.
ron, at the next table, wasn?t having much more luck.
  ?wingardium leviosa!? he shouted, waving his long arms like a windmill.
 ?you?re saying it wrong,? harry heard hermione snap. ?it?s wing-gar-dium levi-o-sa, make the ?gar? nice and long.? ?you do it, then, if you?re so clever,? ron snarled.
  hermione rolled up the sleeves of her gown, flicked her wand, and said, ?wingardium leviosa!?
  their feather rose off the desk and hovered about four feet above their heads.
  ?oh, well done!? cried professor flitwick, clapping. ?everyone see here, miss granger?s done it!?
ron was in a very bad mood by the end of the class.

  ?it?s no wonder no one can stand her,? he said to harry as they pushed their way into the crowded corridor, ?she?s a nightmare, honestly.?
  someone knocked into harry as they hurried past him. it was hermione. harry caught a glimpse of her face ? and was startled to see that she was in tears.
?i think she heard you.?
  ?so?? said ron, but he looked a bit uncomfortable. ?she must?ve noticed she?s got no friends.?
  hermione didn?t turn up for the next class and wasn?t seen all afternoon. on their way down to the great hall for the halloween feast, harry and ron overheard parvati patil telling her friend lavender that hermione was crying in the girls? bathroom and wanted to be left alone. ron looked still more awkward at this, but a moment later they had entered the great hall, where the halloween decorations put hermione out of their minds.
  a thousand live bats fluttered from the walls and ceiling while a thousand more swooped over the tables in low black clouds, making the candles in the pumpkins stutter. the feast appeared suddenly on the golden plates, as it had at the start-of-term banquet.
  harry was just helping himself to a baked potato when professor quirrell came sprinting into the hall, his turban askew and terror on his face. everyone stared as he reached professor dumbledore?s chair, slumped against the table, and gasped, ?troll ? in the dungeons ? thought you ought to know.?
he then sank to the floor in a dead faint.
there was an uproar. it took several purple firecrackers exploding from the end of professor dumbledore?s wand to bring silence.

  ?prefects,? he rumbled, ?lead your houses back to the dormitories immediately!?
percy was in his element.
  ?follow me! stick together, first years! no need to fear the troll if you follow my orders! stay close behind me, now. make way, first years coming through! excuse me, i?m a prefect!?
  ?how could a troll get in?? harry asked as they climbed the stairs.
  ?don?t ask me, they?re supposed to be really stupid,? said ron. ?maybe peeves let it in for a halloween joke.?
  they passed different groups of people hurrying in different directions. as they jostled their way through a crowd of confused hufflepuffs, harry suddenly grabbed ron?s arm.
?i?ve just thought ? hermione.?
?what about her??
?she doesn?t know about the troll.?
ron bit his lip.
?oh, all right,? he snapped. ?but percy?d better not see us.?
  ducking down, they joined the hufflepuffs going the other way, slipped down a deserted side corridor, and hurried off toward the girls? bathroom. they had just turned the corner when they heard quick footsteps behind them.
 ?percy!? hissed ron, pulling harry behind a large stone griffin. peering around it, however, they saw not percy but snape. he crossed the corridor and disappeared from view.
  ?what?s he doing?? harry whispered. ?why isn?t he down in the dungeons with the rest of the teachers??
?search me.?

  quietly as possible, they crept along the next corridor after snape?s fading footsteps.
  ?he?s heading for the third floor,? harry said, but ron held up his hand.
?can you smell something??
  harry sniffed and a foul stench reached his nostrils, a mixture of old socks and the kind of public toilet no one seems to clean.
  and then they heard it ? a low grunting, and the shuffling footfalls of gigantic feet. ron pointed ? at the end of a passage to the left, something huge was moving toward them. they shrank into the shadows and watched as it emerged into a patch of moon-light.
  it was a horrible sight. twelve feet tall, its skin was a dull, granite gray, its great lumpy body like a boulder with its small bald head perched on top like a coconut. it had short legs thick as tree trunks with flat, horny feet. the smell coming from it was incredible. it was holding a huge wooden club, which dragged along the floor because its arms were so long.
  the troll stopped next to a doorway and peered inside. it waggled its long ears, making up its tiny mind, then slouched slowly into the room.
?the key?s in the lock,? harry muttered. ?we could lock it in.? ?good idea,? said ron nervously.
  they edged toward the open door, mouths dry, praying the troll wasn?t about to come out of it. with one great leap, harry man-aged to grab the key, slam the door, and lock it.
?yes!?
flushed with their victory, they started to run back up the pas

sage, but as they reached the corner they heard something that made their hearts stop ? a high, petrified scream ? and it was coming from the chamber they?d just chained up.
?oh, no,? said ron, pale as the bloody baron.
?it?s the girls? bathroom!? harry gasped.
?hermione!? they said together.
  it was the last thing they wanted to do, but what choice did they have? wheeling around, they sprinted back to the door and turned the key, fumbling in their panic. harry pulled the door open and they ran inside.
  hermione granger was shrinking against the wall opposite, looking as if she was about to faint. the troll was advancing on her, knocking the sinks off the walls as it went.
  ?confuse it!? harry said desperately to ron, and, seizing a tap, he threw it as hard as he could against the wall.
  the troll stopped a few feet from hermione. it lumbered around, blinking stupidly, to see what had made the noise. its mean little eyes saw harry. it hesitated, then made for him instead, lifting its club as it went.
  ?oy, pea-brain!? yelled ron from the other side of the chamber, and he threw a metal pipe at it. the troll didn?t even seem to notice the pipe hitting its shoulder, but it heard the yell and paused again, turning its ugly snout toward ron instead, giving harry time to run around it.
  ?come on, run, run!? harry yelled at hermione, trying to pull her toward the door, but she couldn?t move, she was still flat against the wall, her mouth open with terror.
the shouting and the echoes seemed to be driving the troll

berserk. it roared again and started toward ron, who was nearest and had no way to escape.
  harry then did something that was both very brave and very stupid: he took a great running jump and managed to fasten his arms around the troll?s neck from behind. the troll couldn?t feel harry hanging there, but even a troll will notice if you stick a long bit of wood up its nose, and harry?s wand had still been in his hand when he?d jumped ? it had gone straight up one of the troll?s nostrils.
  howling with pain, the troll twisted and flailed its club, with harry clinging on for dear life; any second, the troll was going to rip him off or catch him a terrible blow with the club.
  hermione had sunk to the floor in fright; ron pulled out his own wand ? not knowing what he was going to do he heard him-self cry the first spell that came into his head: ?wingardium leviosa! ?
  the club flew suddenly out of the troll?s hand, rose high, high up into the air, turned slowly over ? and dropped, with a sickening crack, onto its owner?s head. the troll swayed on the spot and then fell flat on its face, with a thud that made the whole room tremble.
  harry got to his feet. he was shaking and out of breath. ron was standing there with his wand still raised, staring at what he had done.
it was hermione who spoke first.
?is it ? dead??
 ?i don?t think so,? said harry, ?i think it?s just been knocked out.? he bent down and pulled his wand out of the troll?s nose. it was covered in what looked like lumpy gray glue.

?urgh - troll boogers.?
he wiped it on the troll?s trousers.
  a sudden slamming and loud footsteps made the three of them look up. they hadn?t realized what a racket they had been making, but of course, someone downstairs must have heard the crashes and the troll?s roars. a moment later, professor mcgonagall had come bursting into the room, closely followed by snape, with quirrell bringing up the rear. quirrell took one look at the troll, let out a faint whimper, and sat quickly down on a toilet, clutching his heart.
  snape bent over the troll. professor mcgonagall was looking at ron and harry. harry had never seen her look so angry. her lips were white. hopes of winning fifty points for gryffindor faded quickly from harry?s mind.
  ?what on earth were you thinking of?? said professor mcgonagall, with cold fury in her voice. harry looked at ron, who was still standing with his wand in the air. ?you?re lucky you weren?t killed. why aren?t you in your dormitory??
  snape gave harry a swift, piercing look. harry looked at the floor. he wished ron would put his wand down.
then a small voice came out of the shadows.
?please, professor mcgonagall ? they were looking for me.? ?miss granger!?
hermione had managed to get to her feet at last.
?i went looking for the troll because i ? i thought i could deal with it on my own ? you know, because i?ve read all about them.?
  ron dropped his wand. hermione granger, telling a downright lie to a teacher?

  ?if they hadn?t found me, i?d be dead now. harry stuck his wand up its nose and ron knocked it out with its own club. they didn?t have time to come and fetch anyone. it was about to finish me off when they arrived.?
  harry and ron tried to look as though this story wasn?t new to them.
  ?well ? in that case . . .? said professor mcgonagall, staring at the three of them, ?miss granger, you foolish girl, how could you think of tackling a mountain troll on your own??
  hermione hung her head. harry was speechless. hermione was the last person to do anything against the rules, and here she was, pretending she had, to get them out of trouble. it was as if snape had started handing out sweets.
  ?miss granger, five points will be taken from gryffindor for this, ? said professor mcgonagall. ?i ?m very disappointed in you. if you?re not hurt at all, you?d better get off to gryffindor tower. stu-dents are finishing the feast in their houses.?
hermione left.
professor mcgonagall turned to harry and ron.
  ?well, i still say you were lucky, but not many first years could have taken on a full-grown mountain troll. you each win gryffindor five points. professor dumbledore will be informed of this. you may go.?
  they hurried out of the chamber and didn?t speak at all until they had climbed two floors up. it was a relief to be away from the smell of the troll, quite apart from anything else.
?we should have gotten more than ten points,? ron grumbled. ?five, you mean, once she?s taken off hermione?s.?

  ?good of her to get us out of trouble like that,? ron admitted. ?mind you, we did save her.?
  ?she might not have needed saving if we hadn?t locked the thing in with her,? harry reminded him.
they had reached the portrait of the fat lady.
?pig snout,? they said and entered.
  the common room was packed and noisy. everyone was eating the food that had been sent up. hermione, however, stood alone by the door, waiting for them. there was a very embarrassed pause. then, none of them looking at each other, they all said ?thanks,? and hurried off to get plates.
  but from that moment on, hermione granger became their friend. there are some things you can?t share without ending up liking each other, and knocking out a twelve-foot mountain troll is one of them.

c h a p t e r e l e v e n

quiddi tch
a
 s they entered november, the weather turned very cold. the mountains around the school became icy gray and the lake like chilled steel. every morning the ground was covered in frost. hagrid could be seen from the upstairs windows defrosting broomsticks on the quidditch field, bundled up in a long moleskin overcoat, rabbit fur gloves, and enormous beaverskin boots.
  the quidditch season had begun. on saturday, harry would be playing in his first match after weeks of training: gryffindor versus slytherin. if gryffindor won, they would move up into second place in the house championship.
  hardly anyone had seen harry play because wood had decided that, as their secret weapon, harry should be kept, well, secret. but the news that he was playing seeker had leaked out somehow, and harry didn?t know which was worse ? people telling him he?d be

brilliant or people telling him they?d be running around underneath him holding a mattress.
  it was really lucky that harry now had hermione as a friend. he didn?t know how he?d have gotten through all his homework with-out her, what with all the last-minute quidditch practice wood was making them do. she had also lent him quidditch through the ages, which turned out to be a very interesting read.
  harry learned that there were seven hundred ways of committing a quidditch foul and that all of them had happened during a world cup match in 1473; that seekers were usually the smallest and fastest players, and that most serious quidditch accidents seemed to happen to them; that although people rarely died playing quidditch, referees had been known to vanish and turn up months later in the sahara desert.
  hermione had become a bit more relaxed about breaking rules since harry and ron had saved her from the mountain troll, and she was much nicer for it. the day before harry?s first quidditch match the three of them were out in the freezing courtyard during break, and she had conjured them up a bright blue fire that could be carried around in a jam jar. they were standing with their backs to it, getting warm, when snape crossed the yard. harry noticed at once that snape was limping. harry, ron, and hermione moved closer together to block the fire from view; they were sure it wouldn?t be allowed. unfortunately, something about their guilty faces caught snape?s eye. he limped over. he hadn?t seen the fire, but he seemed to be looking for a reason to tell them off anyway.
?what?s that you?ve got there, potter??
it was quidditch through the ages. harry showed him.

  ?library books are not to be taken outside the school,? said snape. ?give it to me. five points from gryffindor.?
  ?he?s just made that rule up,? harry muttered angrily as snape limped away. ?wonder what?s wrong with his leg??
?dunno, but i hope it?s really hurting him,? said ron bitterly.
the gryffindor common room was very noisy that evening. harry, ron, and hermione sat together next to a window. hermione was checking harry and ron?s charms homework for them. she would never let them copy (?how will you learn??), but by asking her to read it through, they got the right answers anyway.
  harry felt restless. he wanted quidditch through the ages back, to take his mind off his nerves about tomorrow. why should he be afraid of snape? getting up, he told ron and hermione he was going to ask s nape if he could have it.
?better you than me,? they said together, but harry had an idea that snape wouldn?t refuse if there were other teachers listening.
  he made his way down to the staffroom and knocked. there was no answer. he knocked again. nothing.
  perhaps snape had left the book in there? it was worth a try. he pushed the door ajar and peered inside ? and a horrible scene met his eyes.
  snape and filch were inside, alone. snape was holding his robes above his knees. one of his legs was bloody and mangled. filch was handing snape bandages.
  ?blasted thing,? snape was saying. ?how are you supposed to keep your eyes on all three heads at once??
harry tried to shut the door quietly, but ?

?potter!?
  snape?s face was twisted with fury as he dropped his robes quickly to hide his leg. harry gulped.
?i just wondered if i could have my book back.?
?get out! out !?
  harry left, before snape could take any more points from gryffindor. he sprinted back upstairs.
  ?did you get it?? ron asked as harry joined them. ?what?s the matter??
in a low whisper, harry told them what he?d seen.
  ?you know what this means?? he finished breathlessly. ?he tried to get past that three-headed dog at halloween! that?s where he was going when we saw him ? he?s after whatever it?s guarding! and i?d bet my broomstick he let that troll in, to make a diversion!?
hermione?s eyes were wide.
?no ? he wouldn?t,? she said. ?i know he?s not very nice, but he wouldn?t try and steal something dumbledore was keeping safe.?
  ?honestly, hermione, you think all teachers are saints or some-thing,? snapped ron. ?i?m with harry. i wouldn?t put anything past snape. but what?s he after? what?s that dog guarding??
  harry went to bed with his head buzzing with the same question. neville was snoring loudly, but harry couldn?t sleep. he tried to empty his mind ? he needed to sleep, he had to, he had his first quidditch match in a few hours ? but the expression on snape?s face when harry had seen his leg wasn?t easy to forget.
the next morning dawned very bright and cold. the great hall was full of the delicious smell of fried sausages and the cheer-

ful chatter of everyone looking forward to a good quidditch match.
?you?ve got to eat some breakfast.?
?i don?t want anything.?
?just a bit of toast,? wheedled hermione.
?i?m not hungry.?
  harry felt terrible. in an hour?s time he?d be walking onto the field.
  ?harry, you need your strength,? said seamus finnigan. ?seekers are always the ones who get clobbered by the other team.?
  ?thanks, seamus,? said harry, watching seamus pile ketchup on his sausages.
by eleven o?clock the whole school seemed to be out in the stands around the quidditch pitch. many students had binoculars. the seats might be raised high in the air, but it was still difficult to see what was going on sometimes.
  ron and hermione joined neville, seamus, and dean the west ham fan up in the top row. as a surprise for harry, they had painted a large banner on one of the sheets scabbers had ruined. it said potter for president, and dean, who was good at drawing, had done a large gryffindor lion underneath. then hermione had performed a tricky little charm so that the paint flashed different colors.
  meanwhile, in the locker room, harry and the rest of the team were changing into their scarlet quidditch robes (slytherin would be playing in green).
wood cleared his throat for silence.

?okay, men,? he said.
?and women,? said chaser angelina johnson.
?and women,? wood agreed. ?this is it.?
?the big one,? said fred weasley.
?the one we?ve all been waiting for,? said george.
  ?we know oliver?s speech by heart,? fred told harry, ?we were on the team last year.?
  ?shut up, you two,? said wood. ?this is the best team gryffindor?s had in years. we?re going to win. i know it.?
he glared at them all as if to say, ?or else.?
?right. its time. good luck, all of you.?
  harry followed fred and george out of the locker room and, hoping his knees weren?t going to give way, walked onto the field to loud cheers.
  madam hooch was refereeing. she stood in the middle of the field waiting for the two teams, her broom in her hand.
  ?now, i want a nice fair game, all of you,? she said, once they were all gathered around her. harry noticed that she seemed to be speaking particularly to the slytherin captain, marcus flint, a fifth year. harry thought flint looked as if he had some troll blood in him. out of the corner of his eye he saw the fluttering banner high above, flashing potter for president over the crowd. his heart skipped. he felt braver.
?mount your brooms, please.?
harry clambered onto his nimbus two thousand.
madam hooch gave a loud blast on her silver whistle.
fifteen brooms rose up, high, high into the air. they were off. ?and the quaffle is taken immediately by angelina johnson of

gryffindor ? what an excellent chaser that girl is, and rather at-tractive, too ??
?jordan!?
?sorry, professor.?
  the weasley twins? friend, lee jordan, was doing the commentary for the match, closely watched by professor mcgonagall.
  ?and she?s really belting along up there, a neat pass to alicia spinnet, a good find of oliver wood?s, last year only a reserve ? back to johnson and ? no, the slytherins have taken the quaffle, slytherin captain marcus flint gains the quaffle and off he goes ? flint flying like an eagle up there ? he?s going to sc- no, stopped by an excellent move by gryffindor keeper wood and the gryffindors take the quaffle ? that?s chaser katie bell of gryffindor there, nice dive around flint, off up the field and ? ouch ? that must have hurt, hit in the back of the head by a bludger ? quaffle taken by the slytherins ? that?s adrian pucey speeding off toward the goal posts, but he?s blocked by a second bludger ? sent his way by fred or george weasley, can?t tell which ? nice play by the gryffindor beater, anyway, and johnson back in possession of the quaffle, a clear field ahead and off she goes ? she?s really flying ? dodges a speeding bludger ? the goal posts are ahead ? come on, now, angelina ? keeper bletchley dives ? misses ? gryffindors score!?
  gryffindor cheers filled the cold air, with howls and moans from the slytherins.
?budge up there, move along.?
?hagrid!?
  ron and hermione squeezed together to give hagrid enough space to join them.

  ?bin watchin? from me hut,? said hagrid, patting a large pair of binoculars around his neck, ?but it isn?t the same as bein? in the crowd. no sign of the snitch yet, eh??
?nope,? said ron. ?harry hasn?t had much to do yet.?
?kept outta trouble, though, that?s somethin?,? said hagrid, raising his binoculars and peering skyward at the speck that was harry.
  way up above them, harry was gliding over the game, squinting about for some sign of the snitch. this was part of his and wood?s game plan.
  ?keep out of the way until you catch sight of the snitch,? wood had said. ?we don?t want you attacked before you have to be.?
  when angelina had scored, harry had done a couple of loopthe-loops to let off his feelings. now he was back to staring around for the snitch. once he caught sight of a flash of gold, but it was just a reflection from one of the weasleys? wristwatches, and once a bludger decided to come pelting his way, more like a cannonball than anything, but harry dodged it and fred weasley came chasing after it.
  ?all right there, harry?? he had time to yell, as he beat the bludger furiously toward marcus flint.
  ?slytherin in possession,? lee jordan was saying, ?chaser pucey ducks two bludgers, two weasleys, and chaser bell, and speeds toward the ? wait a moment ? was that the snitch??
  a murmur ran through the crowd as adrian pucey dropped the quaffle, too busy looking over his shoulder at the flash of gold that had passed his left ear.
  harry saw it. in a great rush of excitement he dived downward after the streak of gold. slytherin seeker terence higgs had seen it, too. neck and neck they hurtled toward the snitch ? all the

chasers seemed to have forgotten what they were supposed to be doing as they hung in midair to watch.
  harry was faster than higgs ? he could see the little round ball, wings fluttering, darting up ahead ? he put on an extra spurt of speed ?
  wham! a roar of rage echoed from the gryffindors below ? marcus flint had blocked harry on purpose, and harry?s broom spun off course, harry holding on for dear life.
?foul!? screamed the gryffindors.
  madam hooch spoke angrily to flint and then ordered a free shot at the goal posts for gryffindor. but in all the confusion, of course, the golden snitch had disappeared from sight again.
  down in the stands, dean thomas was yelling, ?send him off, ref! red card!?
?what are you talking about, dean?? said ron.
  ?red card!? said dean furiously. ?in soccer you get shown the red card and you?re out of the game!?
?but this isn?t soccer, dean,? ron reminded him.
hagrid, however, was on dean?s side.
  ?they oughta change the rules. flint coulda knocked harry outta the air.?
lee jordan was finding it difficult not to take sides.
?so ? after that obvious and disgusting bit of cheating ?? ?jordan!? growled professor mcgonagall.
?i mean, after that open and revolting foul ??
?jordan, i?m warning you ??
?all right, all right. flint nearly kills the gryffindor seeker, which could happen to anyone, i?m sure, so a penalty to gryffindor,

taken by spinnet, who puts it away, no trouble, and we continue play, gryffindor still in possession.?
  it was as harry dodged another bludger, which went spinning dangerously past his head, that it happened. his broom gave a sudden, frightening lurch. for a split second, he thought he was going to fall. he gripped the broom tightly with both his hands and knees. he?d never felt anything like that.
  it happened again. it was as though the broom was trying to buck him off. but nimbus two thousands did not suddenly decide to buck their riders off. harry tried to turn back toward the gryffindor goal posts ? he had half a mind to ask wood to call time-out ? and then he realized that his broom was completely out of his control. he couldn?t turn it. he couldn?t direct it at all. it was zigzagging through the air, and every now and then making violent swishing movements that almost unseated him.
lee was still commentating.
  ?slytherin in possession ? flint with the quaffle ? passes spinnet ? passes bell ? hit hard in the face by a bludger, hope it broke his nose ? only joking, professor ? slytherins score ? oh no . . .?
  the slytherins were cheering. no one seemed to have noticed that harry?s broom was behaving strangely it was carrying him slowly higher, away from the game, jerking and twitching as it went.
  ?dunno what harry thinks he?s doing,? hagrid mumbled. he stared through his binoculars. ?if i didn? know better, i?d say he?d lost control of his broom . . . but he can?t have. . . .?
suddenly, people were pointing up at harry all over the stands.

his broom had started to roll over and over, with him only just managing to hold on. then the whole crowd gasped. harry?s broom had given a wild jerk and harry swung off it. he was now dangling from it, holding on with only one hand.
  ?did something happen to it when flint blocked him?? seamus whispered.
  ?can?t have,? hagrid said, his voice shaking. ?can?t nothing interfere with a broomstick except powerful dark magic ? no kid could do that to a nimbus two thousand.?
  at these words, hermione seized hagrid?s binoculars, but in-stead of looking up at harry, she started looking frantically at the crowd.
?what are you doing?? moaned ron, gray-faced.
?i knew it,? hermione gasped, ?snape ? look.?
  ron grabbed the binoculars. snape was in the middle of the stands opposite them. he had his eyes fixed on harry and was muttering nonstop under his breath.
?he?s doing something ? jinxing the broom,? said hermione. ?what should we do??
?leave it to me.?
  before ron could say another word, hermione had disappeared. ron turned the binoculars back on harry. his broom was vibrating so hard, it was almost impossible for him to hang on much longer. the whole crowd was on its feet, watching, terrified, as the weasleys flew up to try and pull harry safely onto one of their brooms, but it was no good ? every time they got near him, the broom would jump higher still. they dropped lower and circled beneath him, obviously hoping to catch him if he fell. marcus

flint seized the quaffle and scored five times without anyone noticing.
?come on, hermione,? ron muttered desperately.
  hermione had fought her way across to the stand where snape stood, and was now racing along the row behind him; she didn?t even stop to say sorry as she knocked professor quirrell headfirst into the row in front. reaching snape, she crouched down, pulled out her wand, and whispered a few, well-chosen words. bright blue flames shot from her wand onto the hem of snape?s robes.
  it took perhaps thirty seconds for snape to realize that he was on fire. a sudden yelp told her she had done her job. scooping the fire off him into a little jar in her pocket, she scrambled back along the row ? snape would never know what had happened.
  it was enough. up in the air, harry was suddenly able to clamber back on to his broom.
  ?neville, you can look!? ron said. neville had been sobbing into hagrid?s jacket for the last five minutes.
  harry was speeding toward the ground when the crowd saw him clap his hand to his mouth as though he was about to be sick ? he hit the field on all fours ? coughed ? and something gold fell into his hand.
  ?i ?ve got the snitch! ? he shouted, waving it above his head, and the game ended in complete confusion.
  ?he didn?t catch it, he nearly swalowed it,? flint was still howling twenty minutes later, but it made no difference ? harry hadn?t broken any rules and lee jordan was still happily shouting the results ? gryffindor had won by one hundred and seventy points to sixty. harry heard none of this, though. he was being

made a cup of strong tea back in hagrid?s hut, with ron and hermione.
  ?it was snape,? ron was explaining, ?hermione and i saw him. he was cursing your broomstick, muttering, he wouldn?t take his eyes off you.?
  ?rubbish,? said hagrid, who hadn?t heard a word of what had gone on next to him in the stands. ?why would snape do some-thin? like that??
  harry, ron, and hermione looked at one another, wondering what to tell him. harry decided on the truth.
  ?i found out something about him,? he told hagrid. ?he tried to get past that three-headed dog on halloween. it bit him. we think he was trying to steal whatever it?s guarding.?
hagrid dropped the teapot.
?how do you know about fluffy?? he said.
?flufy??
 ?yeah ? he?s mine ? bought him off a greek chappie i met in the pub las? year ? i lent him to dumbledore to guard the ?? ?yes?? said harry eagerly.
  ?now, don?t ask me anymore,? said hagrid gruffly. ?that?s top secret, that is.?
?but snape?s trying to steal it.?
  ?rubbish,? said hagrid again. ?snape?s a hogwarts teacher, he?d do nothin? of the sort.?
?so why did he just try and kill harry?? cried hermione.
  the afternoon?s events certainly seemed to have changed her mind about snape.
?i know a jinx when i see one, hagrid, i?ve read all about them!

you?ve got to keep eye contact, and snape wasn?t blinking at all, i saw him!?
  ?i?m tellin? yeh, yer wrong!? said hagrid hotly. ?i don? know why harry?s broom acted like that, but snape wouldn? try an? kill a student! now, listen to me, all three of yeh ? yer meddlin? in things that don? concern yeh. it?s dangerous. you forget that dog, an? you forget what it?s guardin?, that?s between professor dumbledore an? nicolas flamel ??
  ?aha!? said harry, ?so there?s someone called nicolas flamel involved, is there??
hagrid looked furious with himself.

c h a p t e r t w e l v e

the mirror of erised
c
 hristmas was coming. one morning in mid-december, hogwarts woke to find itself covered in several feet of snow. the lake froze solid and the weasley twins were punished for be-witching several snowballs so that they followed quirrell around, bouncing off the back of his turban. the few owls that managed to battle their way through the stormy sky to deliver mail had to be nursed back to health by hagrid before they could fly off again.
  no one could wait for the holidays to start. while the gryffindor common room and the great hall had roaring fires, the drafty corridors had become icy and a bitter wind rattled the windows in the classrooms. worst of all were professor snape?s classes down in the dungeons, where their breath rose in a mist before them and they kept as close as possible to their hot cauldrons.
?i do feel so sorry,? said draco malfoy, one potions class, ?for all

those people who have to stay at hogwarts for christmas because they?re not wanted at home.?
  he was looking over at harry as he spoke. crabbe and goyle chuckled. harry, who was measuring out powdered spine of lion-fish, ignored them. malfoy had been even more unpleasant than usual since the quidditch match. disgusted that the slytherins had lost, he had tried to get everyone laughing at how a wide-mouthed tree frog would be replacing harry as seeker next. then he?d realized that nobody found this funny, because they were all so impressed at the way harry had managed to stay on his bucking broomstick. so malfoy, jealous and angry, had gone back to taunting harry about having no proper family.
  it was true that harry wasn?t going back to privet drive for christmas. professor mcgonagall had come around the week be-fore, making a list of students who would be staying for the holidays, and harry had signed up at once. he didn?t feel sorry for himself at all; this would probably be the best christmas he?d ever had. ron and his brothers were staying, too, because mr. and mrs. weasley were going to romania to visit charlie.
  when they left the dungeons at the end of potions, they found a large fir tree blocking the corridor ahead. two enormous feet sticking out at the bottom and a loud puffing sound told them that hagrid was behind it.
  ?hi, hagrid, want any help?? ron asked, sticking his head through the branches.
?nah, i?m all right, thanks, ron.?
?would you mind moving out of the way?? came malfoy?s cold drawl from behind them. ?are you trying to earn some extra

money, weasley? hoping to be gamekeeper yourself when you leave hogwarts, i suppose ? that hut of hagrid?s must seem like a palace compared to what your family?s used to.?
ron dived at malfoy just as snape came up the stairs. ?weasley!?
ron let go of the front of malfoy?s robes.
  ?he was provoked, professor snape,? said hagrid, sticking his huge hairy face out from behind the tree. ?malfoy was insultin? his family.?
  ?be that as it may, fighting is against hogwarts rules, hagrid,? said snape silkily. ?five points from gryffindor, weasley, and be grateful it isn?t more. move along, all of you.?
  malfoy, crabbe, and goyle pushed roughly past the tree, scattering needles everywhere and smirking.
  ?i?ll get him,? said ron, grinding his teeth at malfoy?s back, ?one of these days, i?ll get him ??
?i hate them both,? said harry, ?malfoy and snape.?
  ?come on, cheer up, it?s nearly christmas,? said hagrid. ?tell yeh what, come with me an? see the great hall, looks a treat.?
  so the three of them followed hagrid and his tree off to the great hall, where professor mcgonagall and professor flitwick were busy with the christmas decorations.
?ah, hagrid, the last tree ? put it in the far corner, would you??
  the hall looked spectacular. festoons of holly and mistletoe hung all around the walls, and no less than twelve towering christmas trees stood around the room, some sparkling with tiny icicles, some glittering with hundreds of candles.
?how many days you got left until yer holidays?? hagrid asked.

  ?just one,? said hermione. ?and that reminds me ? harry, ron, we?ve got half an hour before lunch, we should be in the library.?
  ?oh yeah, you?re right,? said ron, tearing his eyes away from professor flitwick, who had golden bubbles blossoming out of his wand and was trailing them over the branches of the new tree.
  ?the library?? said hagrid, following them out of the hall. ?just before the holidays? bit keen, aren?t yeh??
  ?oh, we?re not working,? harry told him brightly. ?ever since you mentioned nicolas flamel we?ve been trying to find out who he is.?
  ?you what?? hagrid looked shocked. ?listen here ? i?ve told yeh ? drop it. it?s nothin? to you what that dog?s guardin?.?
  ?we just want to know who nicolas flamel is, that?s all,? said hermione.
  ?unless you?d like to tell us and save us the trouble?? harry added. ?we must?ve been through hundreds of books already and we can?t find him anywhere ? just give us a hint ? i know i?ve read his name somewhere.?
?i?m sayin? nothin?,? said hagrid flatly.
  ?just have to find out for ourselves, then,? said ron, and they left hagrid looking disgruntled and hurried off to the library.
  they had indeed been searching books for flamel?s name ever since hagrid had let it slip, because how else were they going to find out what snape was trying to steal? the trouble was, it was very hard to know where to begin, not knowing what flamel might have done to get himself into a book. he wasn?t in great wizards of the twentieth century, or notable magical names of our time; he

was missing, too, from important modern magical discoveries, and a study of recent developments in wizardry. and then, of course, there was the sheer size of the library; tens of thousands of books; thousands of shelves; hundreds of narrow rows.
  hermione took out a list of subjects and titles she had decided to search while ron strode off down a row of books and started pulling them off the shelves at random. harry wandered over to the restricted section. he had been wondering for a while if flamel wasn?t somewhere in there. unfortunately, you needed a specially signed note from one of the teachers to look in any of the restricted books, and he knew he?d never get one. these were the books containing powerful dark magic never taught at hogwarts, and only read by older students studying advanced defense against the dark arts.
?what are you looking for, boy??
?nothing,? said harry.
madam pince the librarian brandished a feather duster at him. ?you?d better get out, then. go on ? out!?
  wishing he?d been a bit quicker at thinking up some story, harry left the library. he, ron, and hermione had already agreed they?d better not ask madam pince where they could find flamel. they were sure she?d be able to tell them, but they couldn?t risk snape hearing what they were up to.
  harry waited outside in the corridor to see if the other two had found anything, but he wasn?t very hopeful. they had been looking for two weeks, after all, but as they only had odd moments between lessons it wasn?t surprising they?d found nothing. what they really needed was a nice long search without madam pince breathing down their necks.

  five minutes later, ron and hermione joined him, shaking their heads. they went off to lunch.
  ?you will keep looking while i?m away, won?t you?? said hermione. ?and send me an owl if you find anything.?
  ?and you could ask your parents if they know who flamel is,? said ron. ?it?d be safe to ask them.?
?very safe, as they?re both dentists,? said hermione.
once the holidays had started, ron and harry were having too good a time to think much about flamel. they had the dormitory to themselves and the common room was far emptier than usual, so they were able to get the good armchairs by the fire. they sat by the hour eating anything they could spear on a toasting fork ? bread, english muffins, marshmallows ? and plotting ways of getting malfoy expelled, which were fun to talk about even if they wouldn?t work.
  ron also started teaching harry wizard chess. this was exactly like muggle chess except that the figures were alive, which made it a lot like directing troops in battle. ron?s set was very old and battered. like everything else he owned, it had once belonged to someone else in his family ? in this case, his grandfather. however, old chessmen weren?t a drawback at all. ron knew them so well he never had trouble getting them to do what he wanted.
  harry played with chessmen seamus finnigan had lent him, and they didn?t trust him at all. he wasn?t a very good player yet and they kept shouting different bits of advice at him, which was confusing. ?don?t send me there, can?t you see his knight? send him, we can afford to lose him.?

  on christmas eve, harry went to bed looking forward to the next day for the food and the fun, but not expecting any presents at all. when he woke early in the morning, however, the first thing he saw was a small pile of packages at the foot of his bed.
  ?merry christmas,? said ron sleepily as harry scrambled out of bed and pulled on his bathrobe.
  ?you, too,? said harry. ?will you look at this? i?ve got some presents!?
  ?what did you expect, turnips?? said ron, turning to his own pile, which was a lot bigger than harry?s.
  harry picked up the top parcel. it was wrapped in thick brown paper and scrawled across it was to harry, from hagrid. inside was a roughly cut wooden flute. hagrid had obviously whittled it him-self. harry blew it ? it sounded a bit like an owl.
a second, very small parcel contained a note.
  we received your message and enclose your christmas present. from uncle vernon and aunt petunia. taped to the note was a fifty-pence piece.
?that?s friendly,? said harry.
ron was fascinated by the fifty pence.
?weird!? he said, ?what a shape! this is money??
  ?you can keep it,? said harry, laughing at how pleased ron was. ?hagrid and my aunt and uncle ? so who sent these??
  ?i think i know who that one?s from,? said ron, turning a bit pink and pointing to a very lumpy parcel. ?my mom. i told her you didn?t expect any presents and ? oh, no,? he groaned, ?she?s made you a weasley sweater.?
  harry had torn open the parcel to find a thick, hand-knitted sweater in emerald green and a large box of homemade fudge.

  ?every year she makes us a sweater,? said ron, unwrapping his own, ?and mine?s always maroon.?
  ?that?s really nice of her,? said harry, trying the fudge, which was very tasty.
  his next present also contained candy ? a large box of chocolate frogs from hermione.
  this only left one parcel. harry picked it up and felt it. it was very light. he unwrapped it.
  something fluid and silvery gray went slithering to the floor where it lay in gleaming folds. ron gasped.
  ?i?ve heard of those,? he said in a hushed voice, dropping the box of every flavor beans he?d gotten from hermione. ?if that?s what i think it is ? they?re really rare, and realy valuable.?
?what is it??
  harry picked the shining, silvery cloth off the floor. it was strange to the touch, like water woven into material.
  ?it?s an invisibility cloak,? said ron, a look of awe on his face. ?i?m sure it is ? try it on.?
harry threw the cloak around his shoulders and ron gave a yell. ?it is! look down!?
  harry looked down at his feet, but they were gone. he dashed to the mirror. sure enough, his reflection looked back at him, just his head suspended in midair, his body completely invisible. he pulled the cloak over his head and his reflection vanished completely.
?there?s a note!? said ron suddenly. ?a note fell out of it!?
  harry pulled off the cloak and seized the letter. written in narrow, loopy writing he had never seen before were the following words:

your father left this in my possession before he died. it is time it was returned to you. use it wel.
a very merry christmas to you.
  there was no signature. harry stared at the note. ron was admiring the cloak.
  ?i?d give anything for one of these,? he said. ?anything. what?s the matter??
  ?nothing,? said harry. he felt very strange. who had sent the cloak? had it really once belonged to his father?
  before he could say or think anything else, the dormitory door was flung open and fred and george weasley bounded in. harry stuffed the cloak quickly out of sight. he didn?t feel like sharing it with anyone else yet.
?merry christmas!?
?hey, look ? harry?s got a weasley sweater, too!?
  fred and george were wearing blue sweaters, one with a large yellow f on it, the other a g.
  ?harry?s is better than ours, though,? said fred, holding up harry?s sweater. ?she obviously makes more of an effort if you?re not family.?
  ?why aren?t you wearing yours, ron?? george demanded. ?come on, get it on, they?re lovely and warm.?
  ?i hate maroon,? ron moaned halfheartedly as he pulled it over his head.
  ?you haven?t got a letter on yours,? george observed. ?i suppose she thinks you don?t forget your name. but we?re not stupid ? we know we?re called gred and forge.?

?what?s all this noise??
  percy weasley stuck his head through the door, looking disapproving. he had clearly gotten halfway through unwrapping his presents as he, too, carried a lumpy sweater over his arm, which fred seized.
  ?p for prefect! get it on, percy, come on, we?re all wearing ours, even harry got one.?
  ?i ? don?t ? want ?? said percy thickly, as the twins forced the sweater over his head, knocking his glasses askew.
  ?and you?re not sitting with the prefects today, either,? said george. ?christmas is a time for family.?
  they frog-marched percy from the room, his arms pinned to his side by his sweater.
harry had never in all his life had such a christmas dinner. a hundred fat, roast turkeys; mountains of roast and boiled potatoes; platters of chipolatas; tureens of buttered peas, silver boats of thick, rich gravy and cranberry sauce ? and stacks of wizard crackers every few feet along the table. these fantastic party favors were nothing like the feeble muggle ones the dursleys usually bought, with their little plastic toys and their flimsy paper hats inside. harry pulled a wizard cracker with fred and it didn?t just bang, it went off with a blast like a cannon and engulfed them all in a cloud of blue smoke, while from the inside exploded a rear admiral?s hat and several live, white mice. up at the high table, dumbledore had swapped his pointed wizard?s hat for a flowered bonnet, and was chuckling merrily at a joke professor flitwick had just read him.
flaming christmas puddings followed the turkey. percy nearly broke his teeth on a silver sickle embedded in his slice. harry

watched hagrid getting redder and redder in the face as he called for more wine, finally kissing professor mcgonagall on the cheek, who, to harry?s amazement, giggled and blushed, her top hat lop-sided.
  when harry finally left the table, he was laden down with a stack of things out of the crackers, including a pack of nonexplodable, luminous balloons, a grow-your-own-warts kit, and his own new wizard chess set. the white mice had disappeared and harry had a nasty feeling they were going to end up as mrs. norris?s christmas dinner.
  harry and the weasleys spent a happy afternoon having a furious snowball fight on the grounds. then, cold, wet, and gasping for breath, they returned to the fire in the gryffindor common room, where harry broke in his new chess set by losing spectacularly to ron. he suspected he wouldn?t have lost so badly if percy hadn?t tried to help him so much.
  after a meal of turkey sandwiches, crumpets, trifle, and christmas cake, everyone felt too full and sleepy to do much before bed except sit and watch percy chase fred and george all over gryffindor tower because they?d stolen his prefect badge.
  it had been harry?s best christmas day ever. yet something had been nagging at the back of his mind all day. not until he climbed into bed was he free to think about it: the invisibility cloak and whoever had sent it.
  ron, full of turkey and cake and with nothing mysterious to bother him, fell asleep almost as soon as he?d drawn the curtains of his four-poster. harry leaned over the side of his own bed and pulled the cloak out from under it.

  his father?s . . . this had been his father?s. he let the material flow over his hands, smoother than silk, light as air. use it wel, the note had said.
  he had to try it, now. he slipped out of bed and wrapped the cloak around himself. looking down at his legs, he saw only moon-light and shadows. it was a very funny feeling.
use it wel.
  suddenly, harry felt wide-awake. the whole of hogwarts was open to him in this cloak. excitement flooded through him as he stood there in the dark and silence. he could go anywhere in this, anywhere, and filch would never know.
  ron grunted in his sleep. should harry wake him? something held him back ? his father?s cloak ? he felt that this time ? the first time ? he wanted to use it alone.
  he crept out of the dormitory, down the stairs, across the common room, and climbed through the portrait hole.
  ?who?s there?? squawked the fat lady. harry said nothing. he walked quickly down the corridor.
  where should he go? he stopped, his heart racing, and thought. and then it came to him. the restricted section in the library. he?d be able to read as long as he liked, as long as it took to find out who flamel was. he set off, drawing the invisibility cloak tight around him as he walked.
  the library was pitch-black and very eerie. harry lit a lamp to see his way along the rows of books. the lamp looked as if it was floating along in midair, and even though harry could feel his arm supporting it, the sight gave him the creeps.
the restricted section was right at the back of the library. step

ping carefully over the rope that separated these books from the rest of the library, he held up his lamp to read the titles.
  they didn?t tell him much. their peeling, faded gold letters spelled words in languages harry couldn?t understand. some had no title at all. one book had a dark stain on it that looked horribly like blood. the hairs on the back of harry?s neck prickled. maybe he was imagining it, maybe not, but he thought a faint whispering was coming from the books, as though they knew someone was there who shouldn?t be.
  he had to start somewhere. setting the lamp down carefully on the floor, he looked along the bottom shelf for an interesting-looking book. a large black and silver volume caught his eye. he pulled it out with difficulty, because it was very heavy, and, balancing it on his knee, let it fall open.
  a piercing, bloodcurdling shriek split the silence ? the book was screaming! harry snapped it shut, but the shriek went on and on, one high, unbroken, earsplitting note. he stumbled backward and knocked over his lamp, which went out at once. panicking, he heard footsteps coming down the corridor outside ? stuffing the shrieking book back on the shelf, he ran for it. he passed filch in the doorway; filch?s pale, wild eyes looked straight through him, and harry slipped under filch?s outstretched arm and streaked off up the corridor, the book?s shrieks still ringing in his ears.
  he came to a sudden halt in front of a tall suit of armor. he had been so busy getting away from the library, he hadn?t paid attention to where he was going. perhaps because it was dark, he didn?t recognize where he was at all. there was a suit of armor near the kitchens, he knew, but he must be five floors above there.

  ?you asked me to come directly to you, professor, if anyone was wandering around at night, and somebody?s been in the library ? restricted section.?
  harry felt the blood drain out of his face. wherever he was, filch must know a shortcut, because his soft, greasy voice was getting nearer, and to his horror, it was snape who replied, ?the restricted section? well, they can?t be far, we?ll catch them.?
  harry stood rooted to the spot as filch and snape came around the corner ahead. they couldn?t see him, of course, but it was a narrow corridor and if they came much nearer they?d knock right into him ? the cloak didn?t stop him from being solid.
  he backed away as quietly as he could. a door stood ajar to his left. it was his only hope. he squeezed through it, holding his breath, trying not to move it, and to his relief he managed to get in-side the room without their noticing anything. they walked straight past, and harry leaned against the wall, breathing deeply, listening to their footsteps dying away. that had been close, very close. it was a few seconds before he noticed anything about the room he had hidden in.
  it looked like an unused classroom. the dark shapes of desks and chairs were piled against the walls, and there was an upturned wastepaper basket ? but propped against the wall facing him was something that didn?t look as if it belonged there, something that looked as if someone had just put it there to keep it out of the way.
  it was a magnificent mirror, as high as the ceiling, with an ornate gold frame, standing on two clawed feet. there was an inscription carved around the top: erised stra ehru oyt ube cafru oyt on wohsi.

  his panic fading now that there was no sound of filch and snape, harry moved nearer to the mirror, wanting to look at him-self but see no reflection again. he stepped in front of it.
  he had to clap his hands to his mouth to stop himself from screaming. he whirled around. his heart was pounding far more furiously than when the book had screamed ? for he had seen not only himself in the mirror, but a whole crowd of people standing right behind him.
  but the room was empty. breathing very fast, he turned slowly back to the mirror.
  there he was, reflected in it, white and scared-looking, and there, reflected behind him, were at least ten others. harry looked over his shoulder ? but still, no one was there. or were they all in-visible, too? was he in fact in a room full of invisible people and this mirrors trick was that it reflected them, invisible or not?
  he looked in the mirror again. a woman standing right behind his reflection was smiling at him and waving. he reached out a hand and felt the air behind him. if she was really there, he?d touch her, their reflections were so close together, but he felt only air ? she and the others existed only in the mirror.
  she was a very pretty woman. she had dark red hair and her eyes ? her eyes are just like mine, harry thought, edging a little closer to the glass. bright green ? exactly the same shape, but then he noticed that she was crying; smiling, but crying at the same time. the tall, thin, black-haired man standing next to her put his arm around her. he wore glasses, and his hair was very untidy. it stuck up at the back, just as harry?s did.
  harry was so close to the mirror now that his nose was nearly touching that of his reflection.

?mom?? he whispered. ?dad??
  they just looked at him, smiling. and slowly, harry looked into the faces of the other people in the mirror, and saw other pairs of green eyes like his, other noses like his, even a little old man who looked as though he had harry?s knobbly knees ? harry was looking at his family, for the first time in his life.
  the potters smiled and waved at harry and he stared hungrily back at them, his hands pressed flat against the glass as though he was hoping to fall right through it and reach them. he had a powerful kind of ache inside him, half joy, half terrible sadness.
  how long he stood there, he didn?t know. the reflections did not fade and he looked and looked until a distant noise brought him back to his senses. he couldn?t stay here, he had to find his way back to bed. he tore his eyes away from his mother?s face, whispered, ?i?ll come back,? and hurried from the room.
?you could have woken me up,? said ron, crossly.
  ?you can come tonight, i?m going back, i want to show you the mirror.?
?i?d like to see your mom and dad,? ron said eagerly.
  ?and i want to see all your family, all the weasleys, you?ll be able to show me your other brothers and everyone.?
  ?you can see them any old time,? said ron. ?just come round my house this summer. anyway, maybe it only shows dead people. shame about not finding flamel, though. have some bacon or something, why aren?t you eating anything??
  harry couldn?t eat. he had seen his parents and would be seeing them again tonight. he had almost forgotten about flamel. it didn?t seem very important anymore. who cared what the three

headed dog was guarding? what did it matter if snape stole it, really?
?are you all right?? said ron. ?you look odd.?
what harry feared most was that he might not be able to find the mirror room again. with ron covered in the cloak, too, they had to walk much more slowly the next night. they tried retracing harry?s route from the library, wandering around the dark passage-ways for nearly an hour.
?i?m freezing,? said ron. ?let?s forget it and go back.? ?no!? harry hissed. ?i know it?s here somewhere.?
  they passed the ghost of a tall witch gliding in the opposite direction, but saw no one else. just as ron started moaning that his feet were dead with cold, harry spotted the suit of armor.
?it?s here ? just here ? yes!?
  they pushed the door open. harry dropped the cloak from around his shoulders and ran to the mirror.
  there they were. his mother and father beamed at the sight of him.
?see?? harry whispered.
?i can?t see anything.?
?look! look at them all . . . there are loads of them. . . .? ?i can only see you.?
?look in it properly, go on, stand where i am.?
 harry stepped aside, but with ron in front of the mirror, he couldn?t see his family anymore, just ron in his paisley pajamas. ron, though, was staring transfixed at his image.
?look at me!? he said.
?can you see all your family standing around you??

  ?no ? i?m alone ? but i?m different ? i look older ? and i?m head boy!?
?what??
  ?i am ? i?m wearing the badge like bill used to ? and i?m holding the house cup and the quidditch cup ? i?m quidditch captain, too!?
  ron tore his eyes away from this splendid sight to look excitedly at harry.
?do you think this mirror shows the future??
  ?how can it? all my family are dead ? let me have another look ??
 ?you had it to yourself all last night, give me a bit more time.? ?you?re only holding the quidditch cup, what?s interesting about that? i want to see my parents.?
?don?t push me ??
 a sudden noise outside in the corridor put an end to their discussion. they hadn?t realized how loudly they had been talking. ?quick!?
  ron threw the cloak back over them as the luminous eyes of mrs. norris came round the door. ron and harry stood quite still, both thinking the same thing ? did the cloak work on cats? after what seemed an age, she turned and left.
  ?this isn?t safe ? she might have gone for filch, i bet she heard us. come on.?
and ron pulled harry out of the room.
the snow still hadn?t melted the next morning. ?want to play chess, harry?? said ron. ?no.?

?why don?t we go down and visit hagrid??
?no . . . you go . . .?
  ?i know what you?re thinking about, harry, that mirror. don?t go back tonight.?
?why not??
  ?i dunno, i?ve just got a bad feeling about it ? and anyway, you?ve had too many close shaves already. filch, snape, and mrs. norris are wandering around. so what if they can?t see you? what if they walk into you? what if you knock something over??
?you sound like hermione.?
?i?m serious, harry, don?t go.?
  but harry only had one thought in his head, which was to get back in front of the mirror, and ron wasn?t going to stop him.
that third night he found his way more quickly than before. he was walking so fast he knew he was making more noise than was wise, but he didn?t meet anyone.
  and there were his mother and father smiling at him again, and one of his grandfathers nodding happily. harry sank down to sit on the floor in front of the mirror. there was nothing to stop him from staying here all night with his family. nothing at all.
except ?
?so ? back again, harry??
  harry felt as though his insides had turned to ice. he looked be-hind him. sitting on one of the desks by the wall was none other than albus dumbledore. harry must have walked straight past him, so desperate to get to the mirror he hadn?t noticed him.
?i ? i didn?t see you, sir.?

  ?strange how nearsighted being invisible can make you,? said dumbledore, and harry was relieved to see that he was smiling.
  ?so,? said dumbledore, slipping off the desk to sit on the floor with harry, ?you, like hundreds before you, have discovered the delights of the mirror of erised.?
?i didn?t know it was called that, sir.?
?but i expect you?ve realized by now what it does??
?it ? well ? it shows me my family ??
?and it showed your friend ron himself as head boy.? ?how did you know ? ??
  ?i don?t need a cloak to become invisible,? said dumbledore gently. ?now, can you think what the mirror of erised shows us all??
harry shook his head.
  ?let me explain. the happiest man on earth would be able to use the mirror of erised like a normal mirror, that is, he would look into it and see himself exactly as he is. does that help??
  harry thought. then he said slowly, ?it shows us what we want . . . whatever we want . . .?
?yes and no,? said dumbledore quietly. ?it shows us nothing
more or less than the deepest, most desperate desire of our hearts.
you, who have never known your family, see them standing around
you. ronald weasley, who has always been overshadowed by his
brothers, sees himself standing alone, the best of all of them. how
ever, this mirror will give us neither knowledge or truth. men have
wasted away before it, entranced by what they have seen, or been
driven mad, not knowing if what it shows is real or even possible.
?the mirror will be moved to a new home tomorrow, harry,

and i ask you not to go looking for it again. if you ever do run across it, you will now be prepared. it does not do to dwell on dreams and forget to live, remember that. now, why don?t you put that admirable cloak back on and get off to bed??
harry stood up.
 ?sir ? professor dumbledore? can i ask you something?? ?obviously, you?ve just done so,? dumbledore smiled. ?you may ask me one more thing, however.?
?what do you see when you look in the mirror??
?i? i see myself holding a pair of thick, woolen socks.? harry stared.
  ?one can never have enough socks,? said dumbledore. ?an-other christmas has come and gone and i didn?t get a single pair. people will insist on giving me books.?
  it was only when he was back in bed that it struck harry that dumbledore might not have been quite truthful. but then, he thought, as he shoved scabbers off his pillow, it had been quite a personal question.

c h a p t e r t h i r t e e n

nicholas flamel
d
 umbledore had convinced harry not to go looking for the mirror of erised again, and for the rest of the christmas holidays the invisibility cloak stayed folded at the bottom of his trunk. harry wished he could forget what he?d seen in the mirror as easily, but he couldn?t. he started having nightmares. over and over again he dreamed about his parents disappearing in a flash of green light, while a high voice cackled with laughter.
  ?you see, dumbledore was right, that mirror could drive you mad,? said ron, when harry told him about these dreams.
  hermione, who came back the day before term started, took a different view of things. she was torn between horror at the idea of harry being out of bed, roaming the school three nights in a row (?if filch had caught you!?), and disappointment that he hadn?t at least found out who nicolas flamel was.
they had almost given up hope of ever finding flamel in a li

brary book, even though harry was still sure he?d read the name somewhere. once term had started, they were back to skimming through books for ten minutes during their breaks. harry had even less time than the other two, because quidditch practice had started again.
  wood was working the team harder than ever. even the endless rain that had replaced the snow couldn?t dampen his spirits. the weasleys complained that wood was becoming a fanatic, but harry was on wood?s side. if they won their next match, against hufflepuff, they would overtake slytherin in the house championship for the first time in seven years. quite apart from wanting to win, harry found that he had fewer nightmares when he was tired out after training.
  then, during one particularly wet and muddy practice session, wood gave the team a bit of bad news. he?d just gotten very angry with the weasleys, who kept dive-bombing each other and pre-tending to fall off their brooms.
  ?will you stop messing around!? he yelled. ?that?s exactly the sort of thing that?ll lose us the match! snape?s refereeing this time, and he?ll be looking for any excuse to knock points off gryffindor!?
george weasley really did fall off his broom at these words.
  ?snape?s refereeing?? he spluttered through a mouthful of mud. ?when?s he ever refereed a quidditch match? he?s not going to be fair if we might overtake slytherin.?
 the rest of the team landed next to george to complain, too. ?it?s not my fault,? said wood. ?we?ve just got to make sure we play a clean game, so snape hasn?t got an excuse to pick on us.?

  which was all very well, thought harry, but he had another reason for not wanting snape near him while he was playing quid-ditch. . . .
  the rest of the team hung back to talk to one another as usual at the end of practice, but harry headed straight back to the gryffindor common room, where he found ron and hermione playing chess. chess was the only thing hermione ever lost at, something harry and ron thought was very good for her.
  ?don?t talk to me for a moment,? said ron when harry sat down next to him, ?i need to concen-? he caught sight of harry?s face. ?what?s the matter with you? you look terrible.?
  speaking quietly so that no one else would hear, harry told the other two about snape?s sudden, sinister desire to be a quidditch referee.
?don?t play,? said hermione at once.
?say you?re ill,? said ron.
?pretend to break your leg,? hermione suggested.
?realy break your leg,? said ron.
  ?i can?t,? said harry. ?there isn?t a reserve seeker. if i back out, gryffindor can?t play at all.?
  at that moment neville toppled into the common room. how he had managed to climb through the portrait hole was anyone?s guess, because his legs had been stuck together with what they recognized at once as the leg-locker curse. he must have had to bunny hop all the way up to gryffindor tower.
  everyone fell over laughing except hermione, who leapt up and performed the countercurse. neville?s legs sprang apart and he got to his feet, trembling.

  ?what happened?? hermione asked him, leading him over to sit with harry and ron.
  ?malfoy,? said neville shakily. ?i met him outside the library. he said he?d been looking for someone to practice that on.?
  ?go to professor mcgonagall!? hermione urged neville. ?re-port him!?
neville shook his head.
?i don?t want more trouble,? he mumbled.
  ?you?ve got to stand up to him, neville!? said ron. ?he?s used to walking all over people, but that?s no reason to lie down in front of him and make it easier.?
  ?there?s no need to tell me i?m not brave enough to be in gryffindor, malfoy?s already done that,? neville choked out.
  harry felt in the pocket of his robes and pulled out a chocolate frog, the very last one from the box hermione had given him for christmas. he gave it to neville, who looked as though he might cry.
  ?you?re worth twelve of malfoy,? harry said. ?the sorting hat chose you for gryffindor, didn?t it? and where?s malfoy? in stinking slytherin.?
 neville?s lips twitched in a weak smile as he unwrapped the frog. ?thanks, harry . . . i think i?ll go to bed. . . . d?you want the card, you collect them, don?t you??
  as neville walked away, harry looked at the famous wizard card.
 ?dumbledore again,? he said, ?he was the first one i ever ?? he gasped. he stared at the back of the card. then he looked up at ron and hermione.

  ?i?ve found him!? he whispered. ?i?ve found flamel! i told you i?d read the name somewhere before, i read it on the train coming here ? listen to this: ?dumbledore is particularly famous for his defeat of the dark wizard grindelwald in 1945, for the discovery of the twelve uses of dragon?s blood, and his work on alchemy with his partner, ni colas flamel?!?
  hermione jumped to her feet. she hadn?t looked so excited since they?d gotten back the marks for their very first piece of homework.
  ?stay there!? she said, and she sprinted up the stairs to the girls? dormitories. harry and ron barely had time to exchange mystified looks before she was dashing back, an enormous old book in her arms.
  ?i never thought to look in here!? she whispered excitedly. ?i got this out of the library weeks ago for a bit of light reading.?
  ?light?? said ron, but hermione told him to be quiet until she?d looked something up, and started flicking frantically through the pages, muttering to herself.
at last she found what she was looking for.
?i knew it! i knew it!?
  ?are we allowed to speak yet?? said ron grumpily. hermione ignored him.
  ?nicolas flamel,? she whispered dramatically, ?is the only known maker of the sorcerer?s stone!?
this didn?t have quite the effect she?d expected.
?the what?? said harry and ron.
?oh, honestly, don?t you two read? look ? read that, there.? she pushed the book toward them, and harry and ron read:

the ancient study of alchemy is concerned with making the sorcerer?s stone, a legendary substance with astonishing powers. the stone wil transform any metal into pure gold. it also produces the elixir of life, which wil make the drinker immortal.
  there have been many reports of the sorcerer?s stone over the centuries, but the only stone currently in existence belongs to mr. nicolas flamel, the noted alchemist and opera lover. mr. flamel, who celebrated his six hundred and sixty-fifth birthday last year, enjoys a quiet life in devon with his wife, perenele (six hundred and fifty-eight).
?see?? said hermione, when harry and ron had finished. ?the dog must be guarding flamel?s sorcerer?s stone! i bet he asked dumbledore to keep it safe for him, because they?re friends and he knew someone was after it, that?s why he wanted the stone moved out of gringotts!?
  ?a stone that makes gold and stops you from ever dying!? said harry. ?no wonder snape?s after it! anyone would want it.?
  ?and no wonder we couldn?t find flamel in that study of recent developments in wizardry,? said ron. ?he?s not exactly recent if he?s six hundred and sixty-five, is he??
the next morning in defense against the dark arts, while copying down different ways of treating werewolf bites, harry and ron were still discussing what they?d do with a sorcerer?s stone if they had one. it wasn?t until ron said he?d buy his own quidditch team that harry remembered about snape and the coming match.

  ?i?m going to play,? he told ron and hermione. ?if i don?t, all the slytherins will think i?m just too scared to face snape. i?ll show them . . . it?ll really wipe the smiles off their faces if we win.?
  ?just as long as we?re not wiping you off the field,? said hermione.
as the match drew nearer, however, harry became more and more nervous, whatever he told ron and hermione. the rest of the team wasn?t too calm, either. the idea of overtaking slytherin in the house championship was wonderful, no one had done it for seven years, but would they be allowed to, with such a biased referee?
  harry didn?t know whether he was imagining it or not, but he seemed to keep running into snape wherever he went. at times, he even wondered whether snape was following him, trying to catch him on his own. potions lessons were turning into a sort of weekly torture, snape was so horrible to harry. could snape possibly know they?d found out about the sorcerer?s stone? harry didn?t see how he could ? yet he sometimes had the horrible feeling that snape could read minds.
harry knew, when they wished him good luck outside the locker rooms the next afternoon, that ron and hermione were wondering whether they?d ever see him alive again. this wasn?t what you?d call comforting. harry hardly heard a word of wood?s pep talk as he pulled on his quidditch robes and picked up his nimbus two thousand.
  ron and hermione, meanwhile, had found a place in the stands next to neville, who couldn?t understand why they looked so grim and worried, or why they had both brought their wands to the

match. little did harry know that ron and hermione had been secretly practicing the leg-locker curse. they?d gotten the idea from malfoy using it on neville, and were ready to use it on snape if he showed any sign of wanting to hurt harry.
  ?now, don?t forget, it?s locomotor mortis,? hermione muttered as ron slipped his wand up his sleeve.
?i know,? ron snapped. ?don?t nag.?
back in the locker room, wood had taken harry aside.
?don?t want to pressure you, potter, but if we ever need an early
capture of the snitch it?s now. finish the game before snape can fa
vor hufflepuff too much.?
 ?the whole school?s out there!? said fred weasley, peering out of the door. ?even ? blimey ? dumbledore?s come to watch!? harry?s heart did a somersault.
   ?dumbledore?? he said, dashing to the door to make sure. fred was right. there was no mistaking that silver beard.
  harry could have laughed out loud with relief. he was safe. there was simply no way that snape would dare to try to hurt him if dumbledore was watching.
perhaps that was why snape was looking so angry as the teams
marched onto the field, something that ron noticed, too.
?i ?ve never seen snape look so mean, ? he told hermione.
?look ? they?re off. ouch!?
someone had poked ron in the back of the head. it was malfoy. ?oh, sorry, weasley, didn?t see you there.?
malfoy grinned broadly at crabbe and goyle.
  ?wonder how long potter?s going to stay on his broom this time? anyone want a bet? what about you, weasley??

  ron didn?t answer; snape had just awarded hufflepuff a penalty because george weasley had hit a bludger at him. hermione, who had all her fingers crossed in her lap, was squinting fixedly at harry, who was circling the game like a hawk, looking for the snitch.
  ?you know how i think they choose people for the gryffindor team?? said malfoy loudly a few minutes later, as snape awarded hufflepuff another penalty for no reason at all. ?it?s people they feel sorry for. see, there?s potter, who?s got no parents, then there?s the weasleys, who?ve got no money ? you should be on the team, longbottom, you?ve got no brains.?
neville went bright red but turned in his seat to face malfoy. ?i?m worth twelve of you, malfoy,? he stammered.
  malfoy, crabbe, and goyle howled with laughter, but ron, still not daring to take his eyes from the game, said, ?you tell him, neville.?
  ?longbottom, if brains were gold you?d be poorer than weasley, and that?s saying something.?
  ron?s nerves were already stretched to the breaking point with anxiety about harry.
?i?m warning you, malfoy ? one more word ??
?ron!? said hermione suddenly, ?harry ? !?
?what? where??
  harry had suddenly gone into a spectacular dive, which drew gasps and cheers from the crowd. hermione stood up, her crossed fingers in her mouth, as harry streaked toward the ground like a bullet.
  ?you?re in luck, weasley, potter?s obviously spotted some money on the ground!? said malfoy.

  ron snapped. before malfoy knew what was happening, ron was on top of him, wrestling him to the ground. neville hesitated, then clambered over the back of his seat to help.
  ?come on, harry!? hermione screamed, leaping onto her seat to watch as harry sped straight at snape ? she didn?t even notice malfoy and ron rolling around under her seat, or the scuffles and yelps coming from the whirl of fists that was neville, crabbe, and goyle.
  up in the air, snape turned on his broomstick just in time to see something scarlet shoot past him, missing him by inches ? the next second, harry had pulled out of the dive, his arm raised in triumph, the snitch clasped in his hand.
  the stands erupted; it had to be a record, no one could ever re-member the snitch being caught so quickly.
  ?ron! ron! where are you? the game?s over! harry?s won! we?ve won! gryffindor is in the lead!? shrieked hermione, dancing up and down on her seat and hugging parvati patil in the row in front.
  harry jumped off his broom, a foot from the ground. he couldn?t believe it. he?d done it ? the game was over; it had barely lasted five minutes. as gryffindors came spilling onto the field, he saw snape land nearby, white-faced and tight-lipped ? then harry felt a hand on his shoulder and looked up into dumbledore?s smiling face.
  ?well done,? said dumbledore quietly, so that only harry could hear. ?nice to see you haven?t been brooding about that mirror . . . been keeping busy . . . excellent . . .?
snape spat bitterly on the ground.
~ ~ ~

harry left the locker room alone some time later, to take his nimbus two thousand back to the broomshed. he couldn?t ever re-member feeling happier. he?d really done something to be proud of now ? no one could say he was just a famous name any more. the evening air had never smelled so sweet. he walked over the damp grass, reliving the last hour in his head, which was a happy blur: gryffindors running to lift him onto their shoulders; ron and hermione in the distance, jumping up and down, ron cheering through a heavy nosebleed.
  harry had reached the shed. he leaned against the wooden door and looked up at hogwarts, with its windows glowing red in the setting sun. gryffindor in the lead. he?d done it, he?d shown snape. . . .
and speaking of s nape . . .
  a hooded figure came swiftly down the front steps of the castle. clearly not wanting to be seen, it walked as fast as possible toward the forbidden forest. harry?s victory faded from his mind as he watched. he recognized the figure?s prowling walk. snape, sneaking into the forest while everyone else was at dinner ? what was going on?
  harry jumped back on his nimbus two thousand and took off. gliding silently over the castle he saw snape enter the forest at a run. he followed.
  the trees were so thick he couldn?t see where snape had gone. he flew in circles, lower and lower, brushing the top branches of trees until he heard voices. he glided toward them and landed noiselessly in a towering beech tree.
  he climbed carefully along one of the branches, holding tight to his broomstick, trying to see through the leaves.

  below, in a shadowy clearing, stood snape, but he wasn?t alone. quirrell was there, too. harry couldn?t make out the look on his face, but he was stuttering worse than ever. harry strained to catch what they were saying.
  ?. . . d-don?t know why you wanted t-t-to meet here of all p-places, severus . . .?
  ?oh, i thought we?d keep this private,? said snape, his voice icy. ?students aren?t supposed to know about the sorcerer?s stone, after all.?
  harry leaned forward. quirrell was mumbling something. snape interrupted him.
?have you found out how to get past that beast of hagrid?s yet?? ?b-b-but severus, i ??
  ?you don?t want me as your enemy, quirrell,? said snape, taking a step toward him.
?i-i don?t know what you ??
?you know perfectly well what i mean.?
  an owl hooted loudly, and harry nearly fell out of the tree. he steadied himself in time to hear snape say, ?? your little bit of hocus-pocus. i?m waiting.?
?b-but i d-d-don?t ??
  ?very well,? snape cut in. ?we?ll have another little chat soon, when you?ve had time to think things over and decided where your loyalties lie.?
  he threw his cloak over his head and strode out of the clearing. it was almost dark now, but harry could see quirrell, standing quite still as though he was petrified.
~ ~ ~

?harry, where have you been?? hermione squeaked.
  ?we won! you won! we won!? shouted ron, thumping harry on the back. ?and i gave malfoy a black eye, and neville tried to take on crabbe and goyle single-handed! he?s still out cold but madam pomfrey says he?ll be all right ? talk about showing slytherin! everyone?s waiting for you in the common room, we?re having a party, fred and george stole some cakes and stuff from the kitchens.?
  ?never mind that now,? said harry breathlessly. ?let?s find an empty room, you wait ?til you hear this. . . .?
  he made sure peeves wasn?t inside before shutting the door be-hind them, then he told them what he?d seen and heard.
  ?so we were right, it is the sorcerer?s stone, and snape?s trying to force quirrell to help him get it. he asked if he knew how to get past fluffy ? and he said something about quirrell?s ?hocus-pocus? ? i reckon there are other things guarding the stone apart from fluffy, loads of enchantments, probably, and quirrell would have done some anti-dark arts spell that snape needs to break through ??
  ?so you mean the stone?s only safe as long as quirrell stands up to snape?? said hermione in alarm.
?it?ll be gone by next tuesday,? said ron.

c h a p t e r f o u r t e e n

norbert the
norwegian ridgeback
q
 uirrell, however, must have been braver than they?d thought. in the weeks that followed he did seem to be get
ting paler and thinner, but it didn?t look as though he?d cracked yet.
  every time they passed the third-floor corridor, harry, ron, and hermione would press their ears to the door to check that fluffy was still growling inside. snape was sweeping about in his usual bad temper, which surely meant that the stone was still safe. whenever harry passed quirrell these days he gave him an encouraging sort of smile, and ron had started telling people off for laughing at quirrell?s stutter.
  hermione, however, had more on her mind than the sorcerer?s stone. she had started drawing up study schedules and color-coding all her notes. harry and ron wouldn?t have minded, but she kept nagging them to do the same.
?hermione, the exams are ages away.?

  ?ten weeks,? hermione snapped. ?that?s not ages, that?s like a second to nicolas flamel.?
  ?but we?re not six hundred years old,? ron reminded her. ?any-way, what are you studying for, you already know it all.?
  ?what am i studying for? are you crazy? you realize we need to pass these exams to get into the second year? they?re very important, i should have started studying a month ago, i don?t know what?s gotten into me.
  unfortunately, the teachers seemed to be thinking along the same lines as hermione. they piled so much homework on them that the easter holidays weren?t nearly as much fun as the christmas ones. it was hard to relax with hermione next to you reciting the twelve uses of dragon?s blood or practicing wand movements. moaning and yawning, harry and ron spent most of their free time in the library with her, trying to get through all their extra work.
  ?i?ll never remember this,? ron burst out one afternoon, throwing down his quill and looking longingly out of the library window. it was the first really fine day they?d had in months. the sky was a clear, forget-me-not blue, and there was a feeling in the air of summer coming.
  harry, who was looking up ?dittany? in one thousand magical herbs and fungi, didn?t look up until he heard ron say, ?hagrid! what are you doing in the library??
  hagrid shuffled into view, hiding something behind his back. he looked very out of place in his moleskin overcoat.
  ?jus? lookin?,? he said, in a shifty voice that got their interest at once. ?an? what?re you lot up ter?? he looked suddenly suspicious. ?yer not still lookin? fer nicolas flamel, are yeh??

  ?oh, we found out who he is ages ago,? said ron impressively. ?and we know what that dog?s guarding, it?s a sorcerer?s st ??
   ?shhhh!? hagrid looked around quickly to see if anyone was listening. ?don? go shoutin? about it, what?s the matter with yeh??
  ?there are a few things we wanted to ask you, as a matter of fact,? said harry, ?about what?s guarding the stone apart from fluffy ??
  ?shhhh!? said hagrid again. ?listen ? come an? see me later, i?m not promisin? i?ll tell yeh anythin?, mind, but don? go rabbitin? about it in here, students aren? s?pposed ter know. they?ll think i?ve told yeh ??
?see you later, then,? said harry.
hagrid shuffled off.
  ?what was he hiding behind his back?? said hermione thought-fully.
?do you think it had anything to do with the stone??
  ?i?m going to see what section he was in,? said ron, who?d had enough of working. he came back a minute later with a pile of books in his arms and slammed them down on the table.
   ?dragons!? he whispered. ?hagrid was looking up stuff about dragons! look at these: dragon species of great britain and ireland; from egg to inferno, a dragon keeper?s guide.?
  ?hagrid?s always wanted a dragon, he told me so the first time i ever met him,? said harry.
  ?but it?s against our laws,? said ron. ?dragon breeding was outlawed by the warlocks? convention of 1709, everyone knows that. its hard to stop muggles from noticing us if we?re keeping dragons in the back garden ? anyway, you can?t tame dragons, it?s dan

gerous. you should see the burns charlie?s got off wild ones in romania.?
?but there aren?t wild dragons in britain?? said harry.
  ?of course there are,? said ron. ?common welsh green and hebridean blacks. the ministry of magic has a job hushing them up, i can tell you. our kind have to keep putting spells on muggles who?ve spotted them, to make them forget.?
?so what on earth?s hagrid up to?? said hermione.
when they knocked on the door of the gamekeeper?s hut an hour later, they were surprised to see that all the curtains were closed. hagrid called ?who is it?? before he let them in, and then shut the door quickly behind them.
  it was stifling hot inside. even though it was such a warm day, there was a blazing fire in the grate. hagrid made them tea and offered them stoat sandwiches, which they refused.
?so ? yeh wanted to ask me somethin???
  ?yes,? said harry. there was no point beating around the bush. ?we were wondering if you could tell us what?s guarding the sorcerer?s stone apart from fluffy.?
hagrid frowned at him.
  ?o? course i can?t,? he said. ?number one, i don? know meself. number two, yeh know too much already, so i wouldn? tell yeh if i could. that stone?s here fer a good reason. it was almost stolen outta gringotts ? i s?ppose yeh?ve worked that out an? all? beats me how yeh even know abou? fluffy.?
?oh, come on, hagrid, you might not want to tell us, but you do know, you know everything that goes on round here,? said

hermione in a warm, flattering voice. hagrid?s beard twitched and they could tell he was smiling. ?we only wondered who had done the guarding, really.? hermione went on. ?we wondered who dumbledore had trusted enough to help him, apart from you.?
  hagrid?s chest swelled at these last words. harry and ron beamed at hermione.
  ?well, i don? s?pose it could hurt ter tell yeh that . . . let?s see . . . he borrowed fluffy from me . . . then some o? the teachers did enchantments . . . professor sprout ? professor flitwick ? professor mcgonagall ?? he ticked them off on his fingers, ?professor quirrell ? an? dumbledore himself did somethin?, o? course. hang on, i?ve forgotten someone. oh yeah, professor snape.?
?snape??
  ?yeah ? yer not still on abou? that, are yeh? look, snape helped protect the stone, he?s not about ter steal it.?
  harry knew ron and hermione were thinking the same as he was. if snape had been in on protecting the stone, it must have been easy to find out how the other teachers had guarded it. he probably knew everything ? except, it seemed, quirrell?s spell and how to get past fluffy.
  ?you?re the only one who knows how to get past fluffy, aren?t you, hagrid?? said harry anxiously. ?and you wouldn?t tell any-one, would you? not even one of the teachers??
  ?not a soul knows except me an? dumbledore,? said hagrid proudly.
  ?well, that?s something,? harry muttered to the others. ?ha-grid, can we have a window open? i?m boiling.?
  ?can?t, harry, sorry,? said hagrid. harry noticed him glance at the fire. harry looked at it, too.

?hagrid ? what?s that??
  but he already knew what it was. in the very heart of the fire, underneath the kettle, was a huge, black egg.
?ah,? said hagrid, fiddling nervously with his beard, ?that?s ? ?
er . . .
  ?where did you get it, hagrid?? said ron, crouching over the fire to get a closer look at the egg. ?it must?ve cost you a for-tune.?
  ?won it,? said hagrid. ?las? night. i was down in the village havin? a few drinks an? got into a game o? cards with a stranger. think he was quite glad ter get rid of it, ter be honest.?
  ?but what are you going to do with it when it?s hatched?? said hermione.
  ?well, i?ve bin doin? some readin?,? said hagrid, pulling a large book from under his pillow. ?got this outta the library ? dragon breeding for pleasure and profit ? it?s a bit outta date, o? course, but it?s all in here. keep the egg in the fire, ?cause their mothers breathe on ?em, see, an? when it hatches, feed it on a bucket o? brandy mixed with chicken blood every half hour. an? see here ? how ter recognize diff?rent eggs ? what i got there?s a norwegian ridge-back. they?re rare, them.?
he looked very pleased with himself, but hermione didn?t. ?hagrid, you live in a wooden house,? she said.
  but hagrid wasn?t listening. he was humming merrily as he stoked the fire.
so now they had something else to worry about: what might hap-pen to hagrid if anyone found out he was hiding an illegal dragon in his hut.

  ?wonder what it?s like to have a peaceful life,? ron sighed, as evening after evening they struggled through all the extra home-work they were getting. hermione had now started making study schedules for harry and ron, too. it was driving them nuts.
  then, one breakfast time, hedwig brought harry another note from hagrid. he had written only two words: it?s hatching.
  ron wanted to skip herbology and go straight down to the hut. hermione wouldn?t hear of it.
  ?hermione, how many times in our lives are we going to see a dragon hatching??
  ?we?ve got lessons, we?ll get into trouble, and that?s nothing to what hagrid?s going to be in when someone finds out what he?s doing ??
?shut up!? harry whispered.
  malfoy was only a few feet away and he had stopped dead to listen. how much had he heard? harry didn?t like the look on malfoy?s face at all.
  ron and hermione argued all the way to herbology and in the end, hermione agreed to run down to hagrid?s with the other two during morning break. when the bell sounded from the castle at the end of their lesson, the three of them dropped their trowels at once and hurried through the grounds to the edge of the forest. hagrid greeted them, looking flushed and excited.
?it?s nearly out.? he ushered them inside.
the egg was lying on the table. there were deep cracks in it. some-thing was moving inside; a funny clicking noise was coming from it.
  they all drew their chairs up to the table and watched with bated breath.

  all at once there was a scraping noise and the egg split open. the baby dragon flopped onto the table. it wasn?t exactly pretty; harry thought it looked like a crumpled, black umbrella. its spiny wings were huge compared to its skinny jet body, it had a long snout with wide nostrils, the stubs of horns and bulging, orange eyes.
it sneezed. a couple of sparks flew out of its snout.
  ?isn?t he beautiful?? hagrid murmured. he reached out a hand to stroke the dragon?s head. it snapped at his fingers, showing pointed fangs.
?bless him, look, he knows his mommy!? said hagrid.
  ?hagrid,? said hermione, ?how fast do norwegian ridgebacks grow, exactly??
 hagrid was about to answer when the color suddenly drained from his face ? he leapt to his feet and ran to the window. ?what?s the matter??
  ?someone was lookin? through the gap in the curtains ? it?s a kid ? he?s runnin? back up ter the school.?
  harry bolted to the door and looked out. even at a distance there was no mistaking him.
malfoy had seen the dragon.
something about the smile lurking on malfoy?s face during the next week made harry, ron, and hermione very nervous. they spent most of their free time in hagrid?s darkened hut, trying to reason with him.
?just let him go,? harry urged. ?set him free.?
?i can?t,? said hagrid. ?he?s too little. he?d die.?

  they looked at the dragon. it had grown three times in length in just a week. smoke kept furling out of its nostrils. hagrid hadn?t been doing his gamekeeping duties because the dragon was keeping him so busy. there were empty brandy bottles and chicken feathers all over the floor.
  ?i?ve decided to call him norbert,? said hagrid, looking at the dragon with misty eyes. ?he really knows me now, watch. norbert! norbert! where?s mommy??
?he?s lost his marbles,? ron muttered in harry?s ear.
  ?hagrid,? said harry loudly, ?give it two weeks and norbert?s going to be as long as your house. malfoy could go to dumbledore at any moment.?
hagrid bit his lip.
  ?i ? i know i can?t keep him forever, but i can?t jus? dump him, can?t.?
harry suddenly turned to ron.
?charlie,? he said.
?you?re losing it, too,? said ron. ?i?m ron, remember??
  ?no ? charlie ? your brother, charlie. in romania. studying dragons. we could send norbert to him. charlie can take care of him and then put him back in the wild!?
?brilliant!? said ron. ?how about it, hagrid??
  and in the end, hagrid agreed that they could send an owl to charlie to ask him.
the following week dragged by. wednesday night found hermione and harry sitting alone in the common room, long after everyone else had gone to bed. the clock on the wall had just

chimed midnight when the portrait hole burst open. ron appeared out of nowhere as he pulled off harry?s invisibility cloak. he had been down at hagrid?s hut, helping him feed norbert, who was now eating dead rats by the crate.
  ?it bit me!? he said, showing them his hand, which was wrapped in a bloody handkerchief. ?i?m not going to be able to hold a quill for a week. i tell you, that dragon?s the most horrible animal i?ve ever met, but the way hagrid goes on about it, you?d think it was a fluffy little bunny rabbit. when it bit me he told me off for frightening it. and when i left, he was singing it a lullaby.?
there was a tap on the dark window.
  ?its hedwig!? said harry, hurrying to let her in. ?she?ll have charlie?s answer!?
the three of them put their heads together to read the note.
dear ron,
how are you? thanks for the letter ? i?d be glad to take the norwegian ridgeback, but it won?t be easy getting him here. i think the best thing will be to send him over with some friends of mine who are coming to visit me next week. trouble is, they mustn?t be seen carrying an illegal dragon.
  could you get the ridgeback up the tallest tower at mid-night on saturday? they can meet you there and take him away while it?s still dark.
send me an answer as soon as possible.
love, charlie

they looked at one another.
  ?we?ve got the invisibility cloak,? said harry. ?it shouldn?t be too difficult ? i think the cloak?s big enough to cover two of us and norbert.?
it was a mark of how bad the last week had been that the other two agreed with him. anything to get rid of norbert ? and malfoy.
there was a hitch. by the next morning, ron?s bitten hand had swollen to twice its usual size. he didn?t know whether it was safe to go to madam pomfrey ? would she recognize a dragon bite? by the afternoon, though, he had no choice. the cut had turned a nasty shade of green. it looked as if norbert?s fangs were poisonous.
  harry and hermione rushed up to the hospital wing at the end of the day to find ron in a terrible state in bed.
  ?it?s not just my hand,? he whispered, ?although that feels like it?s about to fall off. malfoy told madam pomfrey he wanted to borrow one of my books so he could come and have a good laugh at me. he kept threatening to tell her what really bit me ? i?ve told her it was a dog, but i don?t think she believes me ? i shouldn?t have hit him at the quidditch match, that?s why he?s doing this.?
harry and hermione tried to calm ron down.
  ?it?ll all be over at midnight on saturday,? said hermione, but this didn?t soothe ron at all. on the contrary, he sat bolt upright and broke into a sweat.
  ?midnight on saturday!? he said in a hoarse voice. ?oh no ? oh no ? i?ve just remembered ? charlie?s letter was in that book malfoy took, he?s going to know we?re getting rid of norbert.?

  harry and hermione didn?t get a chance to answer. madam pomfrey came over at that moment and made them leave, saying ron needed sleep.
?it?s too late to change the plan now,? harry told hermione. ?we haven?t got time to send charlie another owl, and this could be our only chance to get rid of norbert. we?ll have to risk it. and we have got the invisibility cloak, malfoy doesn?t know about that.?
  they found fang the boarhound sitting outside with a bandaged tail when they went to tell hagrid, who opened a window to talk to them.
  ?i won?t let you in,? he puffed. ?norbert?s at a tricky stage ? nothin? i can?t handle.?
  when they told him about charlie?s letter, his eyes filled with tears, although that might have been because norbert had just bit-ten him on the leg.
  ?aargh! it?s all right, he only got my boot ? jus? playin? ? he?s only a baby, after all.?
  the baby banged its tail on the wall, making the windows rattle. harry and hermione walked back to the castle feeling saturday couldn?t come quickly enough.
they would have felt sorry for hagrid when the time came for him to say good-bye to norbert if they hadn?t been so worried about what they had to do. it was a very dark, cloudy night, and they were a bit late arriving at hagrid?s hut because they?d had to wait for peeves to get out of their way in the entrance hall, where he?d been playing tennis against the wall.

hagrid had norbert packed and ready in a large crate.
  ?he?s got lots o? rats an? some brandy fer the journey,? said ha-grid in a muffled voice. ?an? i?ve packed his teddy bear in case he gets lonely.?
  from inside the crate came ripping noises that sounded to harry as though the teddy was having his head torn off.
  ?bye-bye, norbert!? hagrid sobbed, as harry and hermione covered the crate with the invisibility cloak and stepped underneath it themselves. ?mommy will never forget you!?
  how they managed to get the crate back up to the castle, they never knew. midnight ticked nearer as they heaved norbert up the marble staircase in the entrance hall and along the dark corridors. up another staircase, then another ? even one of harry?s short-cuts didn?t make the work much easier.
  ?nearly there!? harry panted as they reached the corridor beneath the tallest tower.
  then a sudden movement ahead of them made them almost drop the crate. forgetting that they were already invisible, they shrank into the shadows, staring at the dark outlines of two people grappling with each other ten feet away. a lamp flared.
  professor mcgonagall, in a tartan bathrobe and a hair net, had malfoy by the ear.
?detention!? she shouted. ?and twenty points from slytherin! wandering around in the middle of the night, how dare you ??
  ?you don?t understand, professor. harry potter?s coming ? he?s got a dragon!?
  ?what utter rubbish! how dare you tell such lies! come on ? i shall see professor snape about you, malfoy!?

  the steep spiral staircase up to the top of the tower seemed the easiest thing in the world after that. not until they?d stepped out into the cold night air did they throw off the cloak, glad to be able to breathe properly again. hermione did a sort of jig.
?malfoy?s got detention! i could sing!?
?don?t,? harry advised her.
  chuckling about malfoy, they waited, norbert thrashing about in his crate. about ten minutes later, four broomsticks came swooping down out of the darkness.
  charlie?s friends were a cheery lot. they showed harry and hermione the harness they?d rigged up, so they could suspend norbert between them. they all helped buckle norbert safely into it and then harry and hermione shook hands with the others and thanked them very much.
at last, norbert was going . . . going . . . gone.
  they slipped back down the spiral staircase, their hearts as light as their hands, now that norbert was off them. no more dragon ? malfoy in detention ? what could spoil their happiness?
  the answer to that was waiting at the foot of the stairs. as they stepped into the corridor, filch?s face loomed suddenly out of the darkness.
?well, well, well,? he whispered, ?we are in trouble.?
they?d left the invisibility cloak on top of the tower.

c h a p t e r f i f t e e n

the forbidden forest
t
 hings couldn?t have been worse. filch took them down to professor mcgonagall?s study on the first floor, where they sat and waited without saying a word to each other. hermione was trembling. excuses, alibis, and wild cover-up stories chased each other around harry?s brain, each more feeble than the last. he couldn?t see how they were going to get out of trouble this time. they were cornered. how could they have been so stupid as to forget the cloak? there was no reason on earth that professor mcgonagall would accept for their being out of bed and creeping around the school in the dead of night, let alone being up the tallest astronomy tower, which was out-of-bounds except for classes. add norbert and the invisibility cloak, and they might as well be packing their bags already.
  had harry thought that things couldn?t have been worse? he was wrong. when professor mcgonagall appeared, she was leading neville.

  ?harry!? neville burst out, the moment he saw the other two. ?i was trying to find you to warn you, i heard malfoy saying he was going to catch you, he said you had a drag ??
  harry shook his head violently to shut neville up, but professor mcgonagall had seen. she looked more likely to breathe fire than norbert as she towered over the three of them.
  ?i would never have believed it of any of you. mr. filch says you were up in the astronomy tower. it?s one o?clock in the morning. explain yourselves.?
it was the first time hermione had ever failed to answer a teacher?s question. she was staring at her slippers, as still as a statue.
  ?i think i?ve got a good idea of what?s been going on,? said professor mcgonagall. ?it doesn?t take a genius to work it out. you fed draco malfoy some cock-and-bull story about a dragon, trying to get him out of bed and into trouble. i?ve already caught him. i sup-pose you think it?s funny that longbottom here heard the story and believed it, too??
  harry caught neville?s eye and tried to tell him without words that this wasn?t true, because neville was looking stunned and hurt. poor, blundering neville ? harry knew what it must have cost him to try and find them in the dark, to warn them.
  ?i?m disgusted, ? said professor mcgonagall. ?four students out of bed in one night! i?ve never heard of such a thing before! you, miss granger, i thought you had more sense. as for you, mr. pot-ter, i thought gryffindor meant more to you than this. all three of you will receive detentions ? yes, you too, mr. longbottom, nothing gives you the right to walk around school at night, especially these days, it?s very dangerous ? and fifty points will be taken from gryffindor.?

  ?fifty?? harry gasped ? they would lose the lead, the lead he?d won in the last quidditch match.
  ?fifty points each,? said professor mcgonagall, breathing heavily through her long, pointed nose.
?professor ? please ??
?you can?t ??
  ?don?t tell me what i can and can?t do, potter. now get back to bed, all of you. i?ve never been more ashamed of gryffindor students.?
  a hundred and fifty points lost. that put gryffindor in last place. in one night, they?d ruined any chance gryffindor had had for the house cup. harry felt as though the bottom had dropped out of his stomach. how could they ever make up for this?
  harry didn?t sleep all night. he could hear neville sobbing into his pillow for what seemed like hours. harry couldn?t think of any-thing to say to comfort him. he knew neville, like himself, was dreading the dawn. what would happen when the rest of gryffindor found out what they?d done?
  at first, gryffindors passing the giant hourglasses that recorded the house points the next day thought there?d been a mistake. how could they suddenly have a hundred and fifty points fewer than yesterday? and then the story started to spread: harry potter, the famous harry potter, their hero of two quidditch matches, had lost them all those points, him and a couple of other stupid first years.
  from being one of the most popular and admired people at the school, harry was suddenly the most hated. even ravenclaws and hufflepuffs turned on him, because everyone had been longing to see slytherin lose the house cup. everywhere harry went, people

pointed and didn?t trouble to lower their voices as they insulted him. slytherins, on the other hand, clapped as he walked past them, whistling and cheering, ?thanks potter, we owe you one!?
only ron stood by him.
  ?they?ll all forget this in a few weeks. fred and george have lost loads of points in all the time they?ve been here, and people still like them.?
  ?they?ve never lost a hundred and fifty points in one go, though, have they?? said harry miserably.
?well ? no,? ron admitted.
  it was a bit late to repair the damage, but harry swore to himself not to meddle in things that weren?t his business from now on. he?d had it with sneaking around and spying. he felt so ashamed of himself that he went to wood and offered to resign from the quidditch team.
  ?resign?? wood thundered. ?what good?ll that do? how are we going to get any points back if we can?t win at quidditch??
  but even quidditch had lost its fun. the rest of the team wouldn?t speak to harry during practice, and if they had to speak about him, they called him ?the seeker.?
  hermione and neville were suffering, too. they didn?t have as bad a time as harry, because they weren?t as well-known, but no-body would speak to them, either. hermione had stopped drawing attention to herself in class, keeping her head down and working in silence.
  harry was almost glad that the exams weren?t far away. all the studying he had to do kept his mind off his misery. he, ron, and hermione kept to themselves, working late into the night, trying to remember the ingredients in complicated potions, learn charms

and spells by heart, memorize the dates of magical discoveries and goblin rebellions. . . .
  then, about a week before the exams were due to start, harry?s new resolution not to interfere in anything that didn?t concern him was put to an unexpected test. walking back from the library on his own one afternoon, he heard somebody whimpering from a classroom up ahead. as he drew closer, he heard quirrell?s voice.
?no ? no ? not again, please ??
  it sounded as though someone was threatening him. harry moved closer.
?all right ? all right ?? he heard quirrell sob.
  next second, quirrell came hurrying out of the classroom straightening his turban. he was pale and looked as though he was about to cry. he strode out of sight; harry didn?t think quirrell had even noticed him. he waited until quirrell?s footsteps had disappeared, then peered into the classroom. it was empty, but a door stood ajar at the other end. harry was halfway toward it before he remembered what he?d promised himself about not meddling.
  all the same, he?d have gambled twelve sorcerer?s stones that snape had just left the room, and from what harry had just heard, snape would be walking with a new spring in his step ? quirrell seemed to have given in at last.
  harry went back to the library, where hermione was testing ron on astronomy. harry told them what he?d heard.
  ?snape?s done it, then!? said ron. ?if quirrell?s told him how to break his anti-dark force spell ??
?there?s still fluffy, though,? said hermione.
?maybe snape?s found out how to get past him without asking hagrid,? said ron, looking up at the thousands of books sur

rounding them. ?i bet there?s a book somewhere in here telling you how to get past a giant three-headed dog. so what do we do, harry??
  the light of adventure was kindling again in ron?s eyes, but hermione answered before harry could.
  ?go to dumbledore. that?s what we should have done ages ago. if we try anything ourselves we?ll be thrown out for sure.?
  ?but we?ve got no proof!? said harry. ?quirrell?s too scared to back us up. snape?s only got to say he doesn?t know how the troll got in at halloween and that he was nowhere near the third floor ? who do you think they?ll believe, him or us? it?s not exactly a secret we hate him, dumbledore?ll think we made it up to get him sacked. filch wouldn?t help us if his life depended on it, he?s too friendly with snape, and the more students get thrown out, the better, he?ll think. and don?t forget, we?re not supposed to know about the stone or fluffy. that?ll take a lot of explaining.?
hermione looked convinced, but ron didn?t.
?if we just do a bit of poking around ??
 ?no,? said harry flatly, ?we?ve done enough poking around.? he pulled a map of jupiter toward him and started to learn the names of its moons.
the following morning, notes were delivered to harry, hermione, and neville at the breakfast table. they were all the same:
your detention will take place at eleven o?clock tonight. meet mr. filch in the entrance hall.


harry had forgotten they still had detentions to do in the furor over the points they?d lost. he half expected hermione to complain that this was a whole night of studying lost, but she didn?t say a word. like harry, she felt they deserved what they?d got.
  at eleven o?clock that night, they said good-bye to ron in the common room and went down to the entrance hall with neville. filch was already there ? and so was malfoy. harry had also for-gotten that malfoy had gotten a detention, too.
  ?follow me,? said filch, lighting a lamp and leading them out-side.
  ?i bet you?ll think twice about breaking a school rule again, won?t you, eh?? he said, leering at them. ?oh yes . . . hard work and pain are the best teachers if you ask me. . . . it?s just a pity they let the old punishments die out . . . hang you by your wrists from the ceiling for a few days, i?ve got the chains still in my office, keep ?em well oiled in case they?re ever needed. . . . right, off we go, and don?t think of running off, now, it?ll be worse for you if you do.?
  they marched off across the dark grounds. neville kept sniffing. harry wondered what their punishment was going to be. it must be something really horrible, or filch wouldn?t be sounding so de-lighted.
  the moon was bright, but clouds scudding across it kept throwing them into darkness. ahead, harry could see the lighted windows of hagrid?s hut. then they heard a distant shout.
?is that you, filch? hurry up, i want ter get started.?
  harry?s heart rose; if they were going to be working with hagrid it wouldn?t be so bad. his relief must have showed in his face, be-cause filch said, ?i suppose you think you?ll be enjoying yourself

with that oaf? well, think again, boy ? it?s into the forest you?re going and i?m much mistaken if you?ll all come out in one piece.?
  at this, neville let out a little moan, and malfoy stopped dead in his tracks.
  ?the forest?? he repeated, and he didn?t sound quite as cool as usual. ?we can?t go in there at night ? there?s all sorts of things in there ? werewolves, i heard.?
  neville clutched the sleeve of harry?s robe and made a choking noise.
  ?that?s your problem, isn?t it?? said filch, his voice cracking with glee. ?should?ve thought of them werewolves before you got in trouble, shouldn?t you??
  hagrid came striding toward them out of the dark, fang at his heel. he was carrying his large crossbow, and a quiver of arrows hung over his shoulder.
  ?abou? time,? he said. ?i bin waitin? fer half an hour already. all right, harry, hermione??
  ?i shouldn?t be too friendly to them, hagrid,? said filch coldly, ?they?re here to be punished, after all.?
  ?that?s why yer late, is it?? said hagrid, frowning at filch. ?bin lecturin? them, eh? ?snot your place ter do that. yeh?ve done yer bit, i?ll take over from here.?
  ?i?ll be back at dawn,? said filch, ?for what?s left of them,? he added nastily, and he turned and started back toward the castle, his lamp bobbing away in the darkness.
malfoy now turned to hagrid.
  ?i?m not going in that forest,? he said, and harry was pleased to hear the note of panic in his voice.

  ?yeh are if yeh want ter stay at hogwarts,? said hagrid fiercely. ?yeh?ve done wrong an? now yeh?ve got ter pay fer it.?
  ?but this is servant stuff, it?s not for students to do. i thought we?d be copying lines or something, if my father knew i was doing this, he?d ??
  ?? tell yer that?s how it is at hogwarts,? hagrid growled. ?copyin? lines! what good?s that ter anyone? yeh?ll do summat useful or yeh?ll get out. if yeh think yer father?d rather you were expelled, then get back off ter the castle an? pack. go on!?
  malfoy didn?t move. he looked at hagrid furiously, but then dropped his gaze.
  ?right then,? said hagrid, ?now, listen carefully, ?cause it?s dangerous what we?re gonna do tonight, an? i don? want no one takin? risks. follow me over here a moment.?
  he led them to the very edge of the forest. holding his lamp up high, he pointed down a narrow, winding earth track that disappeared into the thick black trees. a light breeze lifted their hair as they looked into the forest.
  ?look there,? said hagrid, ?see that stuff shinin? on the ground? silvery stuff? that?s unicorn blood. there?s a unicorn in there bin hurt badly by summat. this is the second time in a week. i found one dead last wednesday. we?re gonna try an? find the poor thing. we might have ter put it out of its misery.?
  ?and what if whatever hurt the unicorn finds us first?? said malfoy, unable to keep the fear out of his voice.
  ?there?s nothin? that lives in the forest that?ll hurt yeh if yer with me or fang,? said hagrid. ?an? keep ter the path. right, now, we?re gonna split inter two parties an? follow the trail in diff?rent direc

tions. there?s blood all over the place, it must?ve bin staggerin? around since last night at least.?
?i want fang,? said malfoy quickly, looking at fang?s long teeth.
  ?all right, but i warn yeh, he?s a coward,? said hagrid. ?so me, harry, an? hermione?ll go one way an? draco, neville, an ? fang?ll go the other. now, if any of us finds the unicorn, we?ll send up green sparks, right? get yer wands out an? practice now ? that?s it ? an? if anyone gets in trouble, send up red sparks, an? we?ll all come an? find yeh ? so, be careful ? let?s go.?
  the forest was black and silent. a little way into it they reached a fork in the earth path, and harry, hermione, and hagrid took the left path while malfoy, neville, and fang took the right.
  they walked in silence, their eyes on the ground. every now and then a ray of moonlight through the branches above lit a spot of silver-blue blood on the fallen leaves.
harry saw that hagrid looked very worried.
?could a werewolf be killing the unicorns?? harry asked.
  ?not fast enough,? said hagrid. ?it?s not easy ter catch a unicorn, they?re powerful magic creatures. i never knew one ter be hurt before.?
  they walked past a mossy tree stump. harry could hear running water; there must be a stream somewhere close by. there were still spots of unicorn blood here and there along the winding path.
  ?you all right, hermione?? hagrid whispered. ?don? worry, it can?t?ve gone far if it?s this badly hurt, an? then we?ll be able ter ? get behind that tree!?
hagrid seized harry and hermione and hoisted them off the path behind a towering oak. he pulled out an arrow and fitted it

into his crossbow, raising it, ready to fire. the three of them listened. something was slithering over dead leaves nearby: it sounded like a cloak trailing along the ground. hagrid was squinting up the dark path, but after a few seconds, the sound faded away.
  ?i knew it,? he murmured. ?there?s summat in here that shouldn? be. ?
?a werewolf?? harry suggested.
  ?that wasn? no werewolf an? it wasn? no unicorn, neither,? said hagrid grimly. ?right, follow me, but careful, now.?
  they walked more slowly, ears straining for the faintest sound. suddenly, in a clearing ahead, something definitely moved.
?who?s there?? hagrid called. ?show yerself ? i?m armed!?
  and into the clearing came ? was it a man, or a horse? to the waist, a man, with red hair and beard, but below that was a horse?s gleaming chestnut body with a long, reddish tail. harry and hermione?s jaws dropped.
?oh, it?s you, ronan,? said hagrid in relief. ?how are yeh?? he walked forward and shook the centaur?s hand.
  ?good evening to you, hagrid,? said ronan. he had a deep, sorrowful voice. ?were you going to shoot me??
  ?can?t be too careful, ronan,? said hagrid, patting his crossbow. ?there?s summat bad loose in this forest. this is harry potter an? hermione granger, by the way. students up at the school. an? this is ronan, you two. he?s a centaur.?
?we?d noticed,? said hermione faintly.
  ?good evening,? said ronan. ?students, are you? and do you learn much, up at the school??

?erm ??
?a bit,? said hermione timidly.
  ?a bit. well, that?s something.? ronan sighed. he flung back his head and stared at the sky. ?mars is bright tonight.?
  ?yeah,? said hagrid, glancing up, too. ?listen, i?m glad we?ve run inter yeh, ronan, ?cause there?s a unicorn bin hurt ? you seen anythin???
  ronan didn?t answer immediately. he stared unblinkingly up-ward, then sighed again.
  ?always the innocent are the first victims,? he said. ?so it has been for ages past, so it is now.?
  ?yeah,? said hagrid, ?but have yeh seen anythin?, ronan? any-thin? unusual??
  ?mars is bright tonight,? ronan repeated, while hagrid watched him impatiently. ?unusually bright.?
  ?yeah, but i was meanin? anythin? unusual a bit nearer home,? said hagrid. ?so yeh haven?t noticed anythin? strange??
  yet again, ronan took a while to answer. at last, he said, ?the forest hides many secrets.?
  a movement in the trees behind ronan made hagrid raise his bow again, but it was only a second centaur, black-haired and -bodied and wilder-looking than ronan.
?hullo, bane,? said hagrid. ?all right??
?good evening, hagrid, i hope you are well??
  ?well enough. look, i?ve jus? bin askin? ronan, you seen any-thin? odd in here lately? there?s a unicorn bin injured ? would yeh know anythin? about it??
bane walked over to stand next to ronan. he looked skyward.

?mars is bright tonight,? he said simply.
  ?we?ve heard,? said hagrid grumpily. ?well, if either of you do see anythin?, let me know, won?t yeh? we?ll be off, then.?
  harry and hermione followed him out of the clearing, staring over their shoulders at ronan and bane until the trees blocked their view.
  ?never,? said hagrid irritably, ?try an? get a straight answer out of a centaur. ruddy stargazers. not interested in anythin? closer?n the moon.?
?are there many of them in here?? asked hermione.
  ?oh, a fair few. . . . keep themselves to themselves mostly, but they?re good enough about turnin? up if ever i want a word. they?re deep, mind, centaurs . . . they know things . . . jus? don? let on much.?
?d?you think that was a centaur we heard earlier?? said harry.
  ?did that sound like hooves to you? nah, if yeh ask me, that was what?s bin killin? the unicorns ? never heard anythin? like it be-fore.?
  they walked on through the dense, dark trees. harry kept looking nervously over his shoulder. he had the nasty feeling they were being watched. he was very glad they had hagrid and his crossbow with them. they had just passed a bend in the path when hermione grabbed hagrid?s arm.
?hagrid! look! red sparks, the others are in trouble!?
  ?you two wait here!? hagrid shouted. ?stay on the path, i?ll come back for yeh!?
  they heard him crashing away through the undergrowth and stood looking at each other, very scared, until they couldn?t hear anything but the rustling of leaves around them.

  ?you don?t think they?ve been hurt, do you?? whispered hermione.
  ?i don?t care if malfoy has, but if something?s got neville . . . it?s our fault he?s here in the first place.?
  the minutes dragged by. their ears seemed sharper than usual. harry?s seemed to be picking up every sigh of the wind, every cracking twig. what was going on? where were the others?
  at last, a great crunching noise announced hagrid?s return. malfoy, neville, and fang were with him. hagrid was fuming. malfoy, it seemed, had sneaked up behind neville and grabbed him as a joke. neville had panicked and sent up the sparks.
  ?we?ll be lucky ter catch anythin? now, with the racket you two were makin?. right, we?re changin? groups ? neville, you stay with me an? hermione, harry, you go with fang an? this idiot. i?m sorry,? hagrid added in a whisper to harry, ?but he?ll have a harder time frightenin? you, an? we?ve gotta get this done.?
  so harry set off into the heart of the forest with malfoy and fang. they walked for nearly half an hour, deeper and deeper into the forest, until the path became almost impossible to follow be-cause the trees were so thick. harry thought the blood seemed to be getting thicker. there were splashes on the roots of a tree, as though the poor creature had been thrashing around in pain close by. harry could see a clearing ahead, through the tangled branches of an ancient oak.
 ?look ?? he murmured, holding out his arm to stop malfoy. something bright white was gleaming on the ground. they inched closer.
it was the unicorn all right, and it was dead. harry had never seen anything so beautiful and sad. its long, slender legs were stuck

out at odd angles where it had fallen and its mane was spread pearly-white on the dark leaves.
  harry had taken one step toward it when a slithering sound made him freeze where he stood. a bush on the edge of the clearing quivered. . . . then, out of the shadows, a hooded figure came crawling across the ground like some stalking beast. harry, malfoy, and fang stood transfixed. the cloaked figure reached the unicorn, lowered its head over the wound in the animals side, and began to drink its blood.
?aaaaaaaaaaargh!?
  malfoy let out a terrible scream and bolted ? so did fang. the hooded figure raised its head and looked right at harry ? unicorn blood was dribbling down its front. it got to its feet and came swiftly toward harry ? he couldn?t move for fear.
  then a pain like he?d never felt before pierced his head; it was as though his scar were on fire. half blinded, he staggered backward. he heard hooves behind him, galloping, and something jumped clean over harry, charging at the figure.
  the pain in harry?s head was so bad he fell to his knees. it took a minute or two to pass. when he looked up, the figure had gone. a centaur was standing over him, not ronan or bane; this one looked younger; he had white-blond hair and a palomino body.
?are you all right?? said the centaur, pulling harry to his feet. ?yes ? thank you ? what was that??
  the centaur didn?t answer. he had astonishingly blue eyes, like pale sapphires. he looked carefully at harry, his eyes lingering on the scar that stood out, livid, on harry?s forehead.

  ?you are the potter boy,? he said. ?you had better get back to hagrid. the forest is not safe at this time ? especially for you. can you ride? it will be quicker this way.
  ?my name is firenze,? he added, as he lowered himself on to his front legs so that harry could clamber onto his back.
  there was suddenly a sound of more galloping from the other side of the clearing. ronan and bane came bursting through the trees, their flanks heaving and sweaty.
?firenze!? bane thundered. ?what are you doing? you have a human on your back! have you no shame? are you a common mule??
  ?do you realize who this is?? said firenze. ?this is the potter boy. the quicker he leaves this forest, the better.?
  ?what have you been telling him?? growled bane. ?remember, firenze, we are sworn not to set ourselves against the heavens. have we not read what is to come in the movements of the planets??
  ronan pawed the ground nervously. ?i?m sure firenze thought he was acting for the best,? he said in his gloomy voice.
bane kicked his back legs in anger.
  ?for the best! what is that to do with us? centaurs are concerned with what has been foretold! it is not our business to run around like donkeys after stray humans in our forest!?
  firenze suddenly reared on to his hind legs in anger, so that harry had to grab his shoulders to stay on.
  ?do you not see that unicorn?? firenze bellowed at bane. ?do you not understand why it was killed? or have the planets not let you in on that secret? i set myself against what is lurking in this forest, bane, yes, with humans alongside me if i must.?
and firenze whisked around; with harry clutching on as best he

could, they plunged off into the trees, leaving ronan and bane be-hind them.
harry didn?t have a clue what was going on.
  ?why?s bane so angry?? he asked. ?what was that thing you saved me from, anyway??
  firenze slowed to a walk, warned harry to keep his head bowed in case of low-hanging branches, but did not answer harry?s question. they made their way through the trees in silence for so long that harry thought firenze didn?t want to talk to him anymore. they were passing through a particularly dense patch of trees, how-ever, when firenze suddenly stopped.
 ?harry potter, do you know what unicorn blood is used for?? ?no,? said harry, startled by the odd question. ?we?ve only used the horn and tail hair in potions.?
  ?that is because it is a monstrous thing, to slay a unicorn,? said firenze. ?only one who has nothing to lose, and everything to gain, would commit such a crime. the blood of a unicorn will keep you alive, even if you are an inch from death, but at a terrible price. you have slain something pure and defenseless to save yourself, and you will have but a half-life, a cursed life, from the moment the blood touches your lips.?
  harry stared at the back of firenze?s head, which was dappled silver in the moonlight.
  ?but who?d be that desperate?? he wondered aloud. ?if you?re going to be cursed forever, death?s better, isn?t it??
  ?it is,? firenze agreed, ?unless all you need is to stay alive long enough to drink something else ? something that will bring you back to full strength and power ? something that will mean you

can never die. mr. potter, do you know what is hidden in the school at this very moment??
  ?the sorcerer?s stone! of course ? the elixir of life! but i don?t understand who ??
  ?can you think of nobody who has waited many years to return to power, who has clung to life, awaiting their chance??
  it was as though an iron fist had clenched suddenly around harry?s heart. over the rustling of the trees, he seemed to hear once more what hagrid had told him on the night they had met: ?some say he died. codswallop, in my opinion. dunno if he had enough human left in him to die.?
?do you mean,? harry croaked, ?that was vol ??
?harry! harry, are you all right??
  hermione was running toward them down the path, hagrid puffing along behind her.
  ?i ?m fine,? said harry, hardly knowing what he was saying. ?the unicorns dead, hagrid, it?s in that clearing back there.?
  ?this is where i leave you,? firenze murmured as hagrid hurried off to examine the unicorn. ?you are safe now.?
harry slid off his back.
  ?good luck, harry potter,? said firenze. ?the planets have been read wrongly before now, even by centaurs. i hope this is one of those times.?
  he turned and cantered back into the depths of the forest, leaving harry shivering behind him.
ron had fallen asleep in the dark common room, waiting for them to return. he shouted something about quidditch fouls when

harry roughly shook him awake. in a matter of seconds, though, he was wide-eyed as harry began to tell him and hermione what had happened in the forest.
  harry couldn?t sit down. he paced up and down in front of the fire. he was still shaking.
  ?snape wants the stone for voldemort . . . and voldemort?s waiting in the forest . . . and all this time we thought snape just wanted to get rich. . . .?
  ?stop saying the name!? said ron in a terrified whisper, as if he thought voldemort could hear them.
harry wasn?t listening.
  ?firenze saved me, but he shouldn?t have done so. . . . bane was furious . . . he was talking about interfering with what the planets say is going to happen. . . . they must show that voldemort?s coming back. . . . bane thinks firenze should have let voldemort kill me. . . . i suppose that?s written in the stars as well.?
?wil you stop saying the name!? ron hissed.
  ?so all i?ve got to wait for now is snape to steal the stone,? harry went on feverishly, ?then voldemort will be able to come and finish me off. . . . well, i suppose bane?ll be happy.?
  hermione looked very frightened, but she had a word of comfort.
  ?harry, everyone says dumbledore?s the only one you-know-who was ever afraid of. with dumbledore around, you-know-who won?t touch you. anyway, who says the centaurs are right? it sounds like fortune-telling to me, and professor mcgonagall says that?s a very imprecise branch of magic.?
the sky had turned light before they stopped talking. they went

to bed exhausted, their throats sore. but the night?s surprises weren?t over.
  when harry pulled back his sheets, he found his invisibility cloak folded neatly underneath them. there was a note pinned to it:
just in case.

c h a p t e r s i x t e e n

through
the trapdoor
i
 n years to come, harry would never quite remember how he had managed to get through his exams when he half expected voldemort to come bursting through the door at any moment. yet the days crept by, and there could be no doubt that fluffy was still alive and well behind the locked door.
   it was sweltering hot, especially in the large classroom where they did their written papers. they had been given special, new quills for the exams, which had been bewitched with an anti-cheating spell.
   they had practical exams as well. professor flitwick called them one by one into his class to see if they could make a pineapple tap-dance across a desk. professor mcgonagall watched them turn a mouse into a snuffbox ? points were given for how pretty the snuffbox was, but taken away if it had whiskers. snape made them all nervous, breathing down their necks while they tried to remember how to make a forgetfulness potion.

  harry did the best he could, trying to ignore the stabbing pains in his forehead, which had been bothering him ever since his trip into the forest. neville thought harry had a bad case of exam nerves because harry couldn?t sleep, but the truth was that harry kept being woken by his old nightmare, except that it was now worse than ever because there was a hooded figure dripping blood in it.
  maybe it was because they hadn?t seen what harry had seen in the forest, or because they didn?t have scars burning on their fore-heads, but ron and hermione didn?t seem as worried about the stone as harry. the idea of voldemort certainly scared them, but he didn?t keep visiting them in dreams, and they were so busy with their studying they didn?t have much time to fret about what snape or anyone else might be up to.
  their very last exam was history of magic. one hour of answering questions about batty old wizards who?d invented self-stirring cauldrons and they?d be free, free for a whole wonderful week until their exam results came out. when the ghost of professor binns told them to put down their quills and roll up their parchment, harry couldn?t help cheering with the rest.
  ?that was far easier than i thought it would be,? said hermione as they joined the crowds flocking out onto the sunny grounds. ?i needn?t have learned about the 1637 werewolf code of conduct or the uprising of elfric the eager.?
  hermione always liked to go through their exam papers after-ward, but ron said this made him feel ill, so they wandered down to the lake and flopped under a tree. the weasley twins and lee jordan were tickling the tentacles of a giant squid, which was basking in the warm shallows.

  ?no more studying,? ron sighed happily, stretching out on the grass. ?you could look more cheerful, harry, we?ve got a week be-fore we find out how badly we?ve done, there?s no need to worry
yet.
harry was rubbing his forehead.
 ?i wish i knew what this means!? he burst out angrily. ?my scar keeps hurting ? it?s happened before, but never as often as this.? ?go to madam pomfrey,? hermione suggested.
  ?i?m not ill,? said harry. ?i think it?s a warning . . . it means danger?s coming. . . .?
ron couldn?t get worked up, it was too hot.
  ?harry, relax, hermione?s right, the stone?s safe as long as dumbledore?s around. anyway, we?ve never had any proof snape found out how to get past fluffy. he nearly had his leg ripped off once, he?s not going to try it again in a hurry. and neville will play quid-ditch for england before hagrid lets dumbledore down.?
  harry nodded, but he couldn?t shake off a lurking feeling that there was something he?d forgotten to do, something important. when he tried to explain this, hermione said, ?that?s just the exams. i woke up last night and was halfway through my transfiguration notes before i remembered we?d done that one.?
  harry was quite sure the unsettled feeling didn?t have anything to do with work, though. he watched an owl flutter toward the school across the bright blue sky, a note clamped in its mouth. ha-grid was the only one who ever sent him letters. hagrid would never betray dumbledore. hagrid would never tell anyone how to get past fluffy . . . never . . . but ?
harry suddenly jumped to his feet.

?where?re you going?? said ron sleepily.
  ?i?ve just thought of something,? said harry. he had turned white. ?we?ve got to go and see hagrid, now.?
?why?? panted hermione, hurrying to keep up.
  ?don?t you think it?s a bit odd,? said harry, scrambling up the grassy slope, ?that what hagrid wants more than anything else is a dragon, and a stranger turns up who just happens to have an egg in his pocket? how many people wander around with dragon eggs if it?s against wizard law? lucky they found hagrid, don?t you think? why didn?t i see it before??
  ?what are you talking about?? said ron, but harry, sprinting across the grounds toward the forest, didn?t answer.
  hagrid was sitting in an armchair outside his house; his trousers and sleeves were rolled up, and he was shelling peas into a large bowl.
  ?hullo,? he said, smiling. ?finished yer exams? got time fer a drink??
?yes, please,? said ron, but harry cut him off.
  ?no, we?re in a hurry. hagrid, i?ve got to ask you something. you know that night you won norbert? what did the stranger you were playing cards with look like??
 ?dunno,? said hagrid casually, ?he wouldn? take his cloak off.? he saw the three of them look stunned and raised his eye-brows.
  ?it?s not that unusual, yeh get a lot o? funny folk in the hog?s head ? that?s one o? the pubs down in the village. mighta bin a dragon dealer, mightn? he? i never saw his face, he kept his hood up.?
harry sank down next to the bowl of peas.

  ?what did you talk to him about, hagrid? did you mention hogwarts at all??
  ?mighta come up,? said hagrid, frowning as he tried to remember. ?yeah . . . he asked what i did, an? i told him i was gamekeeper here. . . . he asked a bit about the sorta creatures i look after . . . so i told him . . . an? i said what i?d always really wanted was a dragon . . . an? then . . . i can? remember too well, ?cause he kept buyin? me drinks. . . . let?s see . . . yeah, then he said he had the dragon egg an? we could play cards fer it if i wanted . . . but he had ter be sure i could handle it, he didn? want it ter go ter any old home. . . . so i told him, after fluffy, a dragon would be easy. . . .?
  ?and did he ? did he seem interested in fluffy?? harry asked, trying to keep his voice calm.
  ?well ? yeah ? how many three-headed dogs d?yeh meet, even around hogwarts? so i told him, fluffy?s a piece o? cake if yeh know how to calm him down, jus? play him a bit o? music an? he?ll go straight off ter sleep ??
hagrid suddenly looked horrified.
  ?i shouldn?ta told yeh that!? he blurted out. ?forget i said it! hey ? where?re yeh goin???
  harry, ron, and hermione didn?t speak to each other at all until they came to a halt in the entrance hall, which seemed very cold and gloomy after the grounds.
  ?we?ve got to go to dumbledore,? said harry. ?hagrid told that stranger how to get past fluffy, and it was either snape or voldemort under that cloak ? it must?ve been easy, once he?d got ha-grid drunk. i just hope dumbledore believes us. firenze might back us up if bane doesn?t stop him. where?s dumbledore?s office??

  they looked around, as if hoping to see a sign pointing them in the right direction. they had never been told where dumbledore lived, nor did they know anyone who had been sent to see him.
  ?we?ll just have to ?? harry began, but a voice suddenly rang across the hall.
?what are you three doing inside??
it was professor mcgonagall, carrying a large pile of books.
  ?we want to see professor dumbledore,? said hermione, rather bravely, harry and ron thought.
 ?see professor dumbledore?? professor mcgonagall repeated, as though this was a very fishy thing to want to do. ?why?? harry swallowed ? now what?
  ?it?s sort of secret,? he said, but he wished at once he hadn?t, be-cause professor mcgonagall?s nostrils flared.
  ?professor dumbledore left ten minutes ago,? she said coldly. ?he received an urgent owl from the ministry of magic and flew off for london at once.?
?he?s gone?? said harry frantically. ?now??
  ?professor dumbledore is a very great wizard, potter, he has many demands on his time ??
?but this is important.?
  ?something you have to say is more important than the ministry of magic, potter??
  ?look,? said harry, throwing caution to the winds, ?professor ? it?s about the sorcerer?s stone ??
  whatever professor mcgonagall had expected, it wasn?t that. the books she was carrying tumbled out of her arms, but she didn?t pick them up.

?how do you know ? ?? she spluttered.
  ?professor, i think ? i know ? that sn? that someone?s going to try and steal the stone. i?ve got to talk to professor dumbledore.?
she eyed him with a mixture of shock and suspicion.
  ?professor dumbledore will be back tomorrow,? she said finally. ?i don?t know how you found out about the stone, but rest assured, no one can possibly steal it, it?s too well protected.?
?but professor ??
  ?potter, i know what i?m talking about,? she said shortly. she bent down and gathered up the fallen books. ?i suggest you all go back outside and enjoy the sunshine.?
but they didn?t.
  ?it?s tonight,? said harry, once he was sure professor mcgonagall was out of earshot. ?snape?s going through the trapdoor tonight. he?s found out everything he needs, and now he?s got dumbledore out of the way. he sent that note, i bet the ministry of magic will get a real shock when dumbledore turns up.?
?but what can we ??
hermione gasped. harry and ron wheeled round.
snape was standing there.
?good afternoon,? he said smoothly.
they stared at him.
  ?you shouldn?t be inside on a day like this,? he said, with an odd, twisted smile.
  ?we were ?? harry began, without any idea what he was going to say.
?you want to be more careful,? said snape. ?hanging around

like this, people will think you?re up to something. and gryffindor really can?t afford to lose any more points, can it??
  harry flushed. they turned to go outside, but snape called them back.
 ?be warned, potter ? any more nighttime wanderings and i will personally make sure you are expelled. good day to you.? he strode off in the direction of the staffroom.
out on the stone steps, harry turned to the others.
  ?right, here?s what we?ve got to do,? he whispered urgently. ?one of us has got to keep an eye on snape ? wait outside the staffroom and follow him if he leaves it. hermione, you?d better do that.?
?why me??
  ?its obvious,? said ron. ?you can pretend to be waiting for professor flitwick, you know.? he put on a high voice, ? ?oh professor flitwick, i?m so worried, i think i got question fourteen b wrong. . . . ? ?
  ?oh, shut up,? said hermione, but she agreed to go and watch out for snape.
  ?and we?d better stay outside the third-floor corridor,? harry told ron. ?come on.?
  but that part of the plan didn?t work. no sooner had they reached the door separating fluffy from the rest of the school than professor mcgonagall turned up again and this time, she lost her temper.
  ?i suppose you think you?re harder to get past than a pack of enchantments!? she stormed. ?enough of this nonsense! if i hear you?ve come anywhere near here again, i?ll take another fifty points from gryffindor! yes, weasley, from my own house!?

  harry and ron went back to the common room. harry had just said, ?at least hermione?s on snape?s tail,? when the portrait of the fat lady swung open and hermione came in.
  ?i ?m sorry, harry! ? she wailed. ?snape came out and asked me what i was doing, so i said i was waiting for flitwick, and snape went to get him, and i?ve only just got away, i don?t know where snape went.?
?well, that?s it then, isn?t it?? harry said.
  the other two stared at him. he was pale and his eyes were glittering.
  ?i?m going out of here tonight and i?m going to try and get to the stone first.?
?you?re mad!? said ron.
  ?you can?t!? said hermione. ?after what mcgonagall and snape have said? you?ll be expelled!?
  ?so what?? harry shouted. ?don?t you understand? if snape gets hold of the stone, voldemort?s coming back! haven?t you heard what it was like when he was trying to take over? there won?t be any hogwarts to get expelled from! he?ll flatten it, or turn it into a school for the dark arts! losing points doesn?t matter any-more, can?t you see? d?you think he?ll leave you and your families alone if gryffindor wins the house cup? if i get caught before i can get to the stone, well, i?ll have to go back to the dursleys and wait for voldemort to find me there, its only dying a bit later than i would have, because i?m never going over to the dark side! i?m going through that trapdoor tonight and nothing you two say is going to stop me! voldemort killed my parents, remember??
he glared at them.

?you?re right, harry,? said hermione in a small voice.
  ?i?ll use the invisibility cloak,? said harry. ?it?s just lucky i got it back.?
?but will it cover all three of us?? said ron.
?all ? all three of us??
?oh, come off it, you don?t think we?d let you go alone??
  ?of course not,? said hermione briskly. ?how do you think you?d get to the stone without us? i?d better go and look through my books, there might be something useful. . . .?
?but if we get caught, you two will be expelled, too.?
  ?not if i can help it,? said hermione grimly. ?flitwick told me in secret that i got a hundred and twelve percent on his exam. they?re not throwing me out after that.?
after dinner the three of them sat nervously apart in the common room. nobody bothered them; none of the gryffindors had any-thing to say to harry any more, after all. this was the first night he hadn?t been upset by it. hermione was skimming through all her notes, hoping to come across one of the enchantments they were about to try to break. harry and ron didn?t talk much. both of them were thinking about what they were about to do.
slowly, the room emptied as people drifted off to bed.
  ?better get the cloak,? ron muttered, as lee jordan finally left, stretching and yawning. harry ran upstairs to their dark dormitory. he pulled out the cloak and then his eyes fell on the flute ha-grid had given him for christmas. he pocketed it to use on fluffy ? he didn?t feel much like singing.
he ran back down to the common room.

  ?we?d better put the cloak on here, and make sure it covers all three of us ? if filch spots one of our feet wandering along on its own ??
  ?what are you doing?? said a voice from the corner of the room. neville appeared from behind an armchair, clutching trevor the toad, who looked as though he?d been making another bid for free-dom.
  ?nothing, neville, nothing,? said harry, hurriedly putting the cloak behind his back.
neville stared at their guilty faces.
?you?re going out again,? he said.
  ?no, no, no,? said hermione. ?no, we?re not. why don?t you go to bed, neville??
  harry looked at the grandfather clock by the door. they couldn?t afford to waste any more time, snape might even now be playing fluffy to sleep.
  ?you can?t go out,? said neville, ?you?ll be caught again. gryffindor will be in even more trouble.?
?you don?t understand,? said harry, ?this is important.?
  but neville was clearly steeling himself to do something desperate.
  ?i won?t let you do it,? he said, hurrying to stand in front of the portrait hole. ?i?ll ? i?ll fight you!?
  ?nevile,? ron exploded, ?get away from that hole and don?t be an idiot ??
  ?don?t you call me an idiot!? said neville. ?i don?t think you should be breaking any more rules! and you were the one who told me to stand up to people!?

  ?yes, but not to us,? said ron in exasperation. ?neville, you don?t know what you?re doing.?
  he took a step forward and neville dropped trevor the toad, who leapt out of sight.
  ?go on then, try and hit me!? said neville, raising his fists. ?i?m ready!?
harry turned to hermione.
?do something,? he said desperately.
hermione stepped forward.
?neville,? she said, ?i?m really, really sorry about this.? she raised her wand.
?petrificus totalus!? she cried, pointing it at neville.
  neville?s arms snapped to his sides. his legs sprang together. his whole body rigid, he swayed where he stood and then fell flat on his face, stiff as a board.
  hermione ran to turn him over. neville?s jaws were jammed together so he couldn?t speak. only his eyes were moving, looking at them in horror.
?what?ve you done to him?? harry whispered.
  ?it?s the full body-bind,? said hermione miserably. ?oh, neville, i?m so sorry.?
?we had to, neville, no time to explain,? said harry.
  ?you?ll understand later, neville,? said ron as they stepped over him and pulled on the invisibility cloak.
  but leaving neville lying motionless on the floor didn?t feel like a very good omen. in their nervous state, every statue?s shadow looked like filch, every distant breath of wind sounded like peeves swooping down on them.

  at the foot of the first set of stairs, they spotted mrs. norris skulking near the top.
  ?oh, let?s kick her, just this once,? ron whispered in harry?s ear, but harry shook his head. as they climbed carefully around her, mrs. norris turned her lamplike eyes on them, but didn?t do any-thing.
  they didn?t meet anyone else until they reached the staircase up to the third floor. peeves was bobbing halfway up, loosening the carpet so that people would trip.
  ?who?s there?? he said suddenly as they climbed toward him. he narrowed his wicked black eyes. ?know you?re there, even if i can?t see you. are you ghoulie or ghostie or wee student beastie??
he rose up in the air and floated there, squinting at them.
  ?should call filch, i should, if something?s a-creeping around unseen.?
harry had a sudden idea.
  ?peeves,? he said, in a hoarse whisper, ?the bloody baron has his own reasons for being invisible.?
  peeves almost fell out of the air in shock. he caught himself in time and hovered about a foot off the stairs.
  ?so sorry, your bloodiness, mr. baron, sir,? he said greasily. ?my mistake, my mistake ? i didn?t see you ? of course i didn?t, you?re invisible ? forgive old peevsie his little joke, sir.?
  ?i have business here, peeves,? croaked harry. ?stay away from this place tonight.?
 ?i will, sir, i most certainly will,? said peeves, rising up in the air again. ?hope your business goes well, baron, i?ll not bother you.? and he scooted off.

?briliant, harry!? whispered ron.
  a few seconds later, they were there, outside the third-floor corridor ? and the door was already ajar.
  ?well, there you are,? harry said quietly, ?snape?s already got past fluffy.?
  seeing the open door somehow seemed to impress upon all three of them what was facing them. underneath the cloak, harry turned to the other two.
  ?if you want to go back, i won?t blame you,? he said. ?you can take the cloak, i won?t need it now.?
?don?t be stupid,? said ron.
?we?re coming,? said hermione.
harry pushed the door open.
  as the door creaked, low, rumbling growls met their ears. all three of the dog?s noses sniffed madly in their direction, even though it couldn?t see them.
?what?s that at its feet?? hermione whispered.
 ?looks like a harp,? said ron. ?snape must have left it there.? ?it must wake up the moment you stop playing,? said harry. ?well, here goes . . .?
  he put hagrid?s flute to his lips and blew. it wasn?t really a tune, but from the first note the beast?s eyes began to droop. harry hardly drew breath. slowly, the dog?s growls ceased ? it tottered on its paws and fell to its knees, then it slumped to the ground, fast asleep.
  ?keep playing,? ron warned harry as they slipped out of the cloak and crept toward the trapdoor. they could feel the dog?s hot, smelly breath as they approached the giant heads.

  ?i think we?ll be able to pull the door open,? said ron, peering over the dog?s back. ?want to go first, hermione??
?no, i don?t!?
  ?all right.? ron gritted his teeth and stepped carefully over the dog?s legs. he bent and pulled the ring of the trapdoor, which swung up and open.
?what can you see?? hermione said anxiously.
  ?nothing ? just black ? there?s no way of climbing down, we?ll just have to drop.?
  harry, who was still playing the flute, waved at ron to get his attention and pointed at himself.
  ?you want to go first? are you sure?? said ron. ?i don?t know how deep this thing goes. give the flute to hermione so she can keep him asleep.?
  harry handed the flute over. in the few seconds? silence, the dog growled and twitched, but the moment hermione began to play, it fell back into its deep sleep.
  harry climbed over it and looked down through the trapdoor. there was no sign of the bottom.
  he lowered himself through the hole until he was hanging on by his fingertips. then he looked up at ron and said, ?if anything happens to me, don?t follow. go straight to the owlery and send hedwig to dumbledore, right??
?right,? said ron.
?see you in a minute, i hope. . . .?
  and harry let go. cold, damp air rushed past him as he fell down, down, down and ?
flump. with a funny, muffled sort of thump he landed on

something soft. he sat up and felt around, his eyes not used to the gloom. it felt as though he was sitting on some sort of plant.
?it?s okay!? he called up to the light the size of a postage stamp, which was the open trapdoor, ?it?s a soft landing, you can jump!?
ron followed right away. he landed, sprawled next to harry.
?what?s this stuff?? were his first words.
  ?dunno, some sort of plant thing. i suppose it?s here to break the fall. come on, hermione!?
  the distant music stopped. there was a loud bark from the dog, but hermione had already jumped. she landed on harry?s other side.
?we must be miles under the school,? she said.
?lucky this plant thing?s here, really,? said ron.
?lucky!? shrieked hermione. ?look at you both!?
  she leapt up and struggled toward a damp wall. she had to struggle because the moment she had landed, the plant had started to twist snakelike tendrils around her ankles. as for harry and ron, their legs had already been bound tightly in long creepers without their noticing.
  hermione had managed to free herself before the plant got a firm grip on her. now she watched in horror as the two boys fought to pull the plant off them, but the more they strained against it, the tighter and faster the plant wound around them.
  ?stop moving!? hermione ordered them. ?i know what this is ? it?s devil?s snare!?
  ?oh, i?m so glad we know what it?s called, that?s a great help,? snarled ron, leaning back, trying to stop the plant from curling around his neck.

  ?shut up, i?m trying to remember how to kill it!? said hermione.
  ?well, hurry up, i can?t breathe!? harry gasped, wrestling with it as it curled around his chest.
  ?devil?s snare, devil?s snare . . . what did professor sprout say? ? it likes the dark and the damp ??
?so light a fire!? harry choked.
  ?yes ? of course ? but there?s no wood!? hermione cried, wringing her hands.
  ?have you gone mad?? ron bellowed. ?are you a witch or not??
  ?oh, right!? said hermione, and she whipped out her wand, waved it, muttered something, and sent a jet of the same bluebell flames she had used on snape at the plant. in a matter of seconds, the two boys felt it loosening its grip as it cringed away from the light and warmth. wriggling and flailing, it unraveled itself from their bodies, and they were able to pull free.
  ?lucky you pay attention in herbology, hermione,? said harry as he joined her by the wall, wiping sweat off his face.
  ?yeah,? said ron, ?and lucky harry doesn?t lose his head in a crisis ? ?there?s no wood,? honestly.?
  ?this way,? said harry, pointing down a stone passageway, which was the only way forward.
  all they could hear apart from their footsteps was the gentle drip of water trickling down the walls. the passageway sloped down-ward, and harry was reminded of gringotts. with an unpleasant jolt of the heart, he remembered the dragons said to be guarding vaults in the wizards? bank. if they met a dragon, a fully-grown dragon ? norbert had been bad enough . . .

?can you hear something?? ron whispered.
  harry listened. a soft rustling and clinking seemed to be coming from up ahead.
?do you think it?s a ghost??
?i don?t know . . . sounds like wings to me.?
?there?s light ahead ? i can see something moving.?
  they reached the end of the passageway and saw before them a brilliantly lit chamber, its ceiling arching high above them. it was full of small, jewel-bright birds, fluttering and tumbling all around the room. on the opposite side of the chamber was a heavy wooden door.
?do you think they?ll attack us if we cross the room?? said ron.
  ?probably,? said harry. ?they don?t look very vicious, but i sup-pose if they all swooped down at once . . . well, there?s no other choice . . . i?ll run.?
  he took a deep breath, covered his face with his arms, and sprinted across the room. he expected to feel sharp beaks and claws tearing at him any second, but nothing happened. he reached the door untouched. he pulled the handle, but it was locked.
  the other two followed him. they tugged and heaved at the door, but it wouldn?t budge, not even when hermione tried her alohomora charm.
?now what?? said ron.
  ?these birds . . . they can?t be here just for decoration,? said hermione.
  they watched the birds soaring overhead, glittering ? glittering?
?they?re not birds!? harry said suddenly. ?they?re keys! winged keys ? look carefully. so that must mean . . .? he looked around

the chamber while the other two squinted up at the flock of keys. ?. . . yes ? look! broomsticks! we?ve got to catch the key to the door!?
?but there are hundreds of them!?
ron examined the lock on the door.
  ?we?re looking for a big, old-fashioned one ? probably silver, like the handle.?
  they each seized a broomstick and kicked off into the air, soaring into the midst of the cloud of keys. they grabbed and snatched, but the bewitched keys darted and dived so quickly it was almost impossible to catch one.
  not for nothing, though, was harry the youngest seeker in a century. he had a knack for spotting things other people didn?t. after a minute?s weaving about through the whirl of rainbow feathers, he noticed a large silver key that had a bent wing, as if it had al-ready been caught and stuffed roughly into the keyhole.
  ?that one!? he called to the others. ?that big one ? there ? no, there ? with bright blue wings ? the feathers are all crumpled on one side.?
  ron went speeding in the direction that harry was pointing, crashed into the ceiling, and nearly fell off his broom.
  ?we?ve got to close in on it!? harry called, not taking his eyes off the key with the damaged wing. ?ron, you come at it from above ? hermione, stay below and stop it from going down ? and i?ll try and catch it. right, now!?
  ron dived, hermione rocketed upward, the key dodged them both, and harry streaked after it; it sped toward the wall, harry leaned forward and with a nasty, crunching noise, pinned it against

the stone with one hand. ron and hermione?s cheers echoed around the high chamber.
  they landed quickly, and harry ran to the door, the key struggling in his hand. he rammed it into the lock and turned ? it worked. the moment the lock had clicked open, the key took flight again, looking very battered now that it had been caught twice.
  ?ready?? harry asked the other two, his hand on the door handle. they nodded. he pulled the door open.
  the next chamber was so dark they couldn?t see anything at all. but as they stepped into it, light suddenly flooded the room to re-veal an astonishing sight.
  they were standing on the edge of a huge chessboard, behind the black chessmen, which were all taller than they were and carved from what looked like black stone. facing them, way across the chamber, were the white pieces. harry, ron and hermione shivered slightly ? the towering white chessmen had no faces.
?now what do we do?? harry whispered.
  ?it?s obvious, isn?t it?? said ron. ?we?ve got to play our way across the room.?
behind the white pieces they could see another door.
?how?? said hermione nervously.
?i think,? said ron, ?we?re going to have to be chessmen.?
  he walked up to a black knight and put his hand out to touch the knights horse. at once, the stone sprang to life. the horse pawed the ground and the knight turned his helmeted head to look down at ron.
?do we ? er ? have to join you to get across??

the black knight nodded. ron turned to the other two.
  ?this needs thinking about. . . .? he said. ?i suppose we?ve got to take the place of three of the black pieces. . . .?
  harry and hermione stayed quiet, watching ron think. finally he said, ?now, don?t be offended or anything, but neither of you are that good at chess ??
  ?we?re not offended,? said harry quickly. ?just tell us what to do.?
  ?well, harry, you take the place of that bishop, and hermione, you go there instead of that castle.?
?what about you??
?i?m going to be a knight,? said ron.
  the chessmen seemed to have been listening, because at these words a knight, a bishop, and a castle turned their backs on the white pieces and walked off the board, leaving three empty squares that harry, ron, and hermione took.
  ?white always plays first in chess,? said ron, peering across the board. ?yes . . . look . . .?
a white pawn had moved forward two squares.
  ron started to direct the black pieces. they moved silently wherever he sent them. harry?s knees were trembling. what if they lost?
?harry ? move diagonally four squares to the right.?
  their first real shock came when their other knight was taken. the white queen smashed him to the floor and dragged him off the board, where he lay quite still, facedown.
  ?had to let that happen,? said ron, looking shaken. ?leaves you free to take that bishop, hermione, go on.?

  every time one of their men was lost, the white pieces showed no mercy. soon there was a huddle of limp black players slumped along the wall. twice, ron only just noticed in time that harry and hermione were in danger. he himself darted around the board, taking almost as many white pieces as they had lost black ones.
  ?we?re nearly there,? he muttered suddenly. ?let me think ? let me think . . .?
the white queen turned her blank face toward him.
  ?yes . . .? said ron softly, ?it?s the only way . . . i?ve got to be taken.?
?no!? harry and hermione shouted.
  ?that?s chess!? snapped ron. ?you?ve got to make some sacrifices! i make my move and she?ll take me ? that leaves you free to checkmate the king, harry!?
?but ??
?do you want to stop snape or not??
?ron ??
 ?look, if you don?t hurry up, he?ll already have the stone!? there was no alternative.
  ?ready?? ron called, his face pale but determined. ?here i go ? now, don?t hang around once you?ve won.?
  he stepped forward, and the white queen pounced. she struck ron hard across the head with her stone arm, and he crashed to the floor ? hermione screamed but stayed on her square ? the white queen dragged ron to one side. he looked as if he?d been knocked out.
shaking, harry moved three spaces to the left.

  the white king took off his crown and threw it at harry?s feet. they had won. the chessmen parted and bowed, leaving the door ahead clear. with one last desperate look back at ron, harry and hermione charged through the door and up the next passageway.
?what if he?s ? ??
  ?he?ll be all right,? said harry, trying to convince himself. ?what do you reckon?s next??
  ?we?ve had sprout?s, that was the devils snare; flitwick must?ve put charms on the keys; mcgonagall transfigured the chessmen to make them alive; that leaves quirrell?s spell, and snape?s . . .?
they had reached another door.
?all right?? harry whispered.
?go on.?
harry pushed it open.
  a disgusting smell filled their nostrils, making both of them pull their robes up over their noses. eyes watering, they saw, flat on the floor in front of them, a troll even larger than the one they had tackled, out cold with a bloody lump on its head.
  ?i?m glad we didn?t have to fight that one,? harry whispered as they stepped carefully over one of its massive legs. ?come on, i can?t breathe.?
  he pulled open the next door, both of them hardly daring to look at what came next ? but there was nothing very frightening in here, just a table with seven differently shaped bottles standing on it in a line.
?snape?s,? said harry. ?what do we have to do??
they stepped over the threshold, and immediately a fire sprang up behind them in the doorway. it wasn?t ordinary fire either; it was

purple. at the same instant, black flames shot up in the doorway leading onward. they were trapped.
  ?look!? hermione seized a roll of paper lying next to the bottles. harry looked over her shoulder to read it:
danger lies before you, while safety lies behind, two of us wil help you, whichever you would find, one among us seven wil let you move ahead, another wil transport the drinker back instead, two among our number hold only nettle wine, three of us are kilers, waiting hidden in line. choose, unless you wish to stay here forevermore,
to help you in your choice, we give you these clues four: first, however slyly the poison tries to hide
you wil always find some on nettle wine?s left side; second, different are those who stand at either end, but if you would move onward, neither is your friend; third, as you see clearly, al are diferent size, neither dwarf nor giant holds death in their insides; fourth, the second left and the second on the right
are twins once you taste them, though different at first sight.
hermione let out a great sigh and harry, amazed, saw that she was smiling, the very last thing he felt like doing.
  ?briliant,? said hermione. ?this isn?t magic ? it?s logic ? a puzzle. a lot of the greatest wizards haven?t got an ounce of logic, they?d be stuck in here forever.?
?but so will we, won?t we??

  ?of course not,? said hermione. ?everything we need is here on this paper. seven bottles: three are poison; two are wine; one will get us safely through the black fire, and one will get us back through the purple.?
?but how do we know which to drink??
?give me a minute.?
  hermione read the paper several times. then she walked up and down the line of bottles, muttering to herself and pointing at them. at last, she clapped her hands.
  ?got it,? she said. ?the smallest bottle will get us through the black fire ? toward the stone.?
harry looked at the tiny bottle.
  ?there?s only enough there for one of us,? he said. ?that?s hardly one swallow.?
they looked at each other.
 ?which one will get you back through the purple flames?? hermione pointed at a rounded bottle at the right end of the line.
  ?you drink that,? said harry. ?no, listen, get back and get ron. grab brooms from the flying-key room, they?ll get you out of the trapdoor and past fluffy ? go straight to the owlery and send hedwig to dumbledore, we need him. i might be able to hold snape off for a while, but i?m no match for him, really.?
?but harry ? what if you-know-who?s with him??
  ?well ? i was lucky once, wasn?t i?? said harry, pointing at his scar. ?i might get lucky again.?
  hermione?s lip trembled, and she suddenly dashed at harry and threw her arms around him.

?hermione!?
?harry ? you?re a great wizard, you know.?
  ?i ?m not as good as you,? said harry, very embarrassed, as she let go of him.
  ?me!? said hermione. ?books! and cleverness! there are more important things ? friendship and bravery and ? oh harry ? be careful!?
  ?you drink first,? said harry. ?you are sure which is which, aren?t you??
  ?positive,? said hermione. she took a long drink from the round bottle at the end, and shuddered.
?it?s not poison?? said harry anxiously.
?no ? but it?s like ice.?
?quick, go, before it wears off.?
?good luck ? take care ??
?go!?
 hermione turned and walked straight through the purple fire. harry took a deep breath and picked up the smallest bottle. he turned to face the black flames.
  ?here i come,? he said, and he drained the little bottle in one gulp.
  it was indeed as though ice was flooding his body. he put the bottle down and walked forward; he braced himself, saw the black flames licking his body, but couldn?t feel them ? for a moment he could see nothing but dark fire ? then he was on the other side, in the last chamber.
  there was already someone there ? but it wasn?t snape. it wasn?t even voldemort.

c h a p t e r s e v e n t e e n

the man
with two faces
i
 t was quirrell. ?you!? gasped harry. quirrell smiled. his face wasn?t twitching at all.
  ?me,? he said calmly. ?i wondered whether i?d be meeting you here, potter.?
?but i thought ? snape ??
  ?severus?? quirrell laughed, and it wasn?t his usual quivering treble, either, but cold and sharp. ?yes, severus does seem the type, doesn?t he? so useful to have him swooping around like an over-grown bat. next to him, who would suspect p-p-poor, st-stuttering p-professor quirrell??
harry couldn?t take it in. this couldn?t be true, it couldn?t. ?but snape tried to kill me!?
  ?no, no, no. i tried to kill you. your friend miss granger accidentally knocked me over as she rushed to set fire to snape at that quidditch match. she broke my eye contact with you. another

few seconds and i?d have got you off that broom. i?d have managed it before then if snape hadn?t been muttering a countercurse, trying to save you.?
?snape was trying to save me??
  ?of course,? said quirrell coolly. ?why do you think he wanted to referee your next match? he was trying to make sure i didn?t do it again. funny, really . . . he needn?t have bothered. i couldn?t do anything with dumbledore watching. all the other teachers thought snape was trying to stop gryffindor from winning, he did make himself unpopular . . . and what a waste of time, when after all that, i?m going to kill you tonight.?
  quirrell snapped his fingers. ropes sprang out of thin air and wrapped themselves tightly around harry.
  ?you?re too nosy to live, potter. scurrying around the school on halloween like that, for all i knew you?d seen me coming to look at what was guarding the stone.?
?you let the troll in??
  ?certainly. i have a special gift with trolls ? you must have seen what i did to the one in the chamber back there? unfortunately, while everyone else was running around looking for it, snape, who already suspected me, went straight to the third floor to head me off ? and not only did my troll fail to beat you to death, that three-headed dog didn?t even manage to bite snape?s leg off properly.
  ?now, wait quietly, potter. i need to examine this interesting mirror.?
  it was only then that harry realized what was standing behind quirrell. it was the mirror of erised.
?this mirror is the key to finding the stone,? quirrell mur

mured, tapping his way around the frame. ?trust dumbledore to come up with something like this . . . but he?s in london . . . i?ll be far away by the time he gets back. . . .?
  all harry could think of doing was to keep quirrell talking and stop him from concentrating on the mirror.
?i saw you and snape in the forest ?? he blurted out.
  ?yes,? said quirrell idly, walking around the mirror to look at the back. ?he was on to me by that time, trying to find out how far i?d got. he suspected me all along. tried to frighten me ? as though he could, when i had lord voldemort on my side. . . .?
  quirrell came back out from behind the mirror and stared hungrily into it.
  ?i see the stone . . . i?m presenting it to my master . . . but where is it??
  harry struggled against the ropes binding him, but they didn?t give. he had to keep quirrell from giving his whole attention to the mirror.
?but snape always seemed to hate me so much.?
  ?oh, he does,? said quirrell casually, ?heavens, yes. he was at hogwarts with your father, didn?t you know? they loathed each other. but he never wanted you dead.?
  ?but i heard you a few days ago, sobbing ? i thought snape was threatening you.
 for the first time, a spasm of fear flitted across quirrell?s face. ?sometimes,? he said, ?i find it hard to follow my master?s instructions ? he is a great wizard and i am weak ??
  ?you mean he was there in the classroom with you?? harry gasped.

  ?he is with me wherever i go,? said quirrell quietly. ?i met him when i traveled around the world. a foolish young man i was then, full of ridiculous ideas about good and evil. lord voldemort showed me how wrong i was. there is no good and evil, there is only power, and those too weak to seek it. . . . since then, i have served him faithfully, although i have let him down many times. he has had to be very hard on me.? quirrell shivered suddenly. ?he does not forgive mistakes easily. when i failed to steal the stone from gringotts, he was most displeased. he punished me . . . decided he would have to keep a closer watch on
?
me. . . .
  quirrell?s voice trailed away. harry was remembering his trip to diagon alley ? how could he have been so stupid? he?d seen quirrell there that very day, shaken hands with him in the leaky cauldron.
quirrell cursed under his breath.
  ?i don?t understand . . . is the stone inside the mirror? should i break it??
harry?s mind was racing.
   what i want more than anything else in the world at the moment, he thought, is to find the stone before quirrel does. so if i look in the mirror, i should see myself finding it ? which means i?l see where it?s hidden! but how can i look without quirrel realizing what i?m up to?
  he tried to edge to the left, to get in front of the glass without quirrell noticing, but the ropes around his ankles were too tight: he tripped and fell over. quirrell ignored him. he was still talking to himself.

  ?what does this mirror do? how does it work? help me, master!?
  and to harry?s horror, a voice answered, and the voice seemed to come from quirrell himself.
?use the boy . . . use the boy . . .?
quirrell rounded on harry.
?yes ? potter ? come here.?
  he clapped his hands once, and the ropes binding harry fell off. harry got slowly to his feet.
  ?come here,? quirrell repeated. ?look in the mirror and tell me what you see.?
harry walked toward him.
   i must lie, he thought desperately. i must look and lie about what i see, that?s al.
  quirrell moved close behind him. harry breathed in the funny smell that seemed to come from quirrell?s turban. he closed his eyes, stepped in front of the mirror, and opened them again.
  he saw his reflection, pale and scared-looking at first. but a moment later, the reflection smiled at him. it put its hand into its pocket and pulled out a blood-red stone. it winked and put the stone back in its pocket ? and as it did so, harry felt something heavy drop into his real pocket. somehow ? incredibly ? he?d gotten the stone.
?well?? said quirrell impatiently. ?what do you see?? harry screwed up his courage.
  ?i see myself shaking hands with dumbledore,? he invented. ?i ? i?ve won the house cup for gryffindor.?
quirrell cursed again.

  ?get out of the way,? he said. as harry moved aside, he felt the sorcerer?s stone against his leg. dare he make a break for it?
  but he hadn?t walked five paces before a high voice spoke, though quirrell wasn?t moving his lips.
?he lies . . . he lies . . .?
  ?potter, come back here!? quirrell shouted. ?tell me the truth! what did you just see??
the high voice spoke again.
?let me speak to him . . . face-to-face. . . .?
?master, you are not strong enough!?
?i have strength enough . . . for this. . . .?
  harry felt as if devil?s snare was rooting him to the spot. he couldn?t move a muscle. petrified, he watched as quirrell reached up and began to unwrap his turban. what was going on? the turban fell away. quirrell?s head looked strangely small without it. then he turned slowly on the spot.
  harry would have screamed, but he couldn?t make a sound. where there should have been a back to quirrell?s head, there was a face, the most terrible face harry had ever seen. it was chalk white with glaring red eyes and slits for nostrils, like a snake.
?harry potter . . .? it whispered.
harry tried to take a step backward but his legs wouldn?t move.
?see what i have become?? the face said. ?mere shadow and va
por . . . i have form only when i can share another?s body . . . but
there have always been those willing to let me into their hearts
and minds. . . . unicorn blood has strengthened me, these past
weeks . . . you saw faithful quirrell drinking it for me in the for
est . . . and once i have the elixir of life, i will be able to create a

body of my own. . . . now . . . why don?t you give me that stone in your pocket??
  so he knew. the feeling suddenly surged back into harry?s legs. he stumbled backward.
  ?don?t be a fool,? snarled the face. ?better save your own life and join me . . . or you?ll meet the same end as your parents. . . . they died begging me for mercy. . . .?
?liar!? harry shouted suddenly.
  quirrell was walking backward at him, so that voldemort could still see him. the evil face was now smiling.
  ?how touching . . .? it hissed. ?i always value bravery. . . . yes, boy, your parents were brave. . . . i killed your father first, and he put up a courageous fight . . . but your mother needn?t have died . . . she was trying to protect you. . . . now give me the stone, unless you want her to have died in vain.?
?never!?
  harry sprang toward the flame door, but voldemort screamed ?seize him!? and the next second, harry felt quirrell?s hand close on his wrist. at once, a needle-sharp pain seared across harry?s scar; his head felt as though it was about to split in two; he yelled, struggling with all his might, and to his surprise, quirrell let go of him. the pain in his head lessened ? he looked around wildly to see where quirrell had gone, and saw him hunched in pain, looking at his fingers ? they were blistering before his eyes.
  ?seize him! seize him!? shrieked voldemort again, and quirrell lunged, knocking harry clean off his feet, landing on top of him, both hands around harry?s neck ? harry?s scar was almost blinding him with pain, yet he could see quirrell howling in agony.

?master, i cannot hold him ? my hands ? my hands!?
  and quirrell, though pinning harry to the ground with his knees, let go of his neck and stared, bewildered, at his own palms ? harry could see they looked burned, raw, red, and shiny.
?then kill him, fool, and be done!? screeched voldemort.
  quirrell raised his hand to perform a deadly curse, but harry, by instinct, reached up and grabbed quirrell?s face ?
?aaaargh!?
  quirrell rolled off him, his face blistering, too, and then harry knew: quirrell couldn?t touch his bare skin, not without suffering terrible pain ? his only chance was to keep hold of quirrell, keep him in enough pain to stop him from doing a curse.
  harry jumped to his feet, caught quirrell by the arm, and hung on as tight as he could. quirrell screamed and tried to throw harry off ? the pain in harry?s head was building ? he couldn?t see ? he could only hear quirrell?s terrible shrieks and voldemort?s yells of, ?kill him! kill him!? and other voices, maybe in harry?s own head, crying, ?harry! harry!?
  he felt quirrell?s arm wrenched from his grasp, knew all was lost, and fell into blackness, down . . . down . . . down . . .
something gold was glinting just above him. the snitch! he tried to catch it, but his arms were too heavy.
  he blinked. it wasn?t the snitch at all. it was a pair of glasses. how strange.
  he blinked again. the smiling face of albus dumbledore swam into view above him.
?good afternoon, harry,? said dumbledore.

  harry stared at him. then he remembered: ?sir! the stone! it was quirrell! he?s got the stone! sir, quick ??
  ?calm yourself, dear boy, you are a little behind the times,? said dumbledore. ?quirrell does not have the stone.?
?then who does? sir, i ??
?harry, please relax, or madam pomfrey will have me thrown
out.
  harry swallowed and looked around him. he realized he must be in the hospital wing. he was lying in a bed with white linen sheets, and next to him was a table piled high with what looked like half the candy shop.
  ?tokens from your friends and admirers,? said dumbledore, beaming. ?what happened down in the dungeons between you and professor quirrell is a complete secret, so, naturally, the whole school knows. i believe your friends misters fred and george weasley were responsible for trying to send you a toilet seat. no doubt they thought it would amuse you. madam pomfrey, how-ever, felt it might not be very hygienic, and confiscated it.?
?how long have i been in here??
  ?three days. mr. ronald weasley and miss granger will be most relieved you have come round, they have been extremely worried.?
?but sir, the stone ??
  ?i see you are not to be distracted. very well, the stone. professor quirrell did not manage to take it from you. i arrived in time to prevent that, although you were doing very well on your own, i must say.?
?you got there? you got hermione?s owl??

  ?we must have crossed in midair. no sooner had i reached lon-don than it became clear to me that the place i should be was the one i had just left. i arrived just in time to pull quirrell off you ??
?it was you.?
?i feared i might be too late.?
  ?you nearly were, i couldn?t have kept him off the stone much longer ??
  ?not the stone, boy, you ? the effort involved nearly killed you. for one terrible moment there, i was afraid it had. as for the stone, it has been destroyed.?
  ?destroyed?? said harry blankly. ?but your friend ? nicolas flamel ??
  ?oh, you know about nicolas?? said dumbledore, sounding quite delighted. ?you did do the thing properly, didn?t you? well, nicolas and i have had a little chat, and agreed it?s all for the best.?
?but that means he and his wife will die, won?t they??
  ?they have enough elixir stored to set their affairs in order and then, yes, they will die.?
dumbledore smiled at the look of amazement on harry?s face.
  ?to one as young as you, i?m sure it seems incredible, but to nicolas and perenelle, it really is like going to bed after a very, very long day. after all, to the well-organized mind, death is but the next great adventure. you know, the stone was really not such a wonderful thing. as much money and life as you could want! the two things most human beings would choose above all ? the trouble is, humans do have a knack of choosing precisely those things that are worst for them.?

  harry lay there, lost for words. dumbledore hummed a little and smiled at the ceiling.
  ?sir?? said harry. ?i?ve been thinking . . . sir ? even if the stone?s gone, vol-, i mean, you-know-who ??
  ?call him voldemort, harry. always use the proper name for things. fear of a name increases fear of the thing itself.?
  ?yes, sir. well, voldemort?s going to try other ways of coming back, isn?t he? i mean, he hasn?t gone, has he??
  ?no, harry, he has not. he is still out there somewhere, perhaps looking for another body to share . . . not being truly alive, he can-not be killed. he left quirrell to die; he shows just as little mercy to his followers as his enemies. nevertheless, harry, while you may only have delayed his return to power, it will merely take someone else who is prepared to fight what seems a losing battle next time ? and if he is delayed again, and again, why, he may never re-turn to power.?
  harry nodded, but stopped quickly, because it made his head hurt. then he said, ?sir, there are some other things i?d like to know, if you can tell me . . . things i want to know the truth about. . . .?
  ?the truth.? dumbledore sighed. ?it is a beautiful and terrible thing, and should therefore be treated with great caution. how-ever, i shall answer your questions unless i have a very good reason not to, in which case i beg you?ll forgive me. i shall not, of course, lie.?
  ?well . . . voldemort said that he only killed my mother because she tried to stop him from killing me. but why would he want to kill me in the first place??

dumbledore sighed very deeply this time.
  ?alas, the first thing you ask me, i cannot tell you. not today. not now. you will know, one day . . . put it from your mind for now, harry. when you are older . . . i know you hate to hear this . . . when you are ready, you will know.?
and harry knew it would be no good to argue.
?but why couldn?t quirrell touch me??
  ?your mother died to save you. if there is one thing voldemort cannot understand, it is love. he didn?t realize that love as powerful as your mother?s for you leaves its own mark. not a scar, no visible sign . . . to have been loved so deeply, even though the per-son who loved us is gone, will give us some protection forever. it is in your very skin. quirrell, full of hatred, greed, and ambition, sharing his soul with voldemort, could not touch you for this reason. it was agony to touch a person marked by something so good.?
  dumbledore now became very interested in a bird out on the windowsill, which gave harry time to dry his eyes on the sheet. when he had found his voice again, harry said, ?and the invisibility cloak ? do you know who sent it to me??
  ?ah ? your father happened to leave it in my possession, and i thought you might like it.? dumbledore?s eyes twinkled. ?useful things . . . your father used it mainly for sneaking off to the kitchens to steal food when he was here.?
?and there?s something else . . .?
?fire away.?
?quirrell said snape ??
?professor snape, harry.?

  ?yes, him ? quirrell said he hates me because he hated my father. is that true??
  ?well, they did rather detest each other. not unlike yourself and mr. malfoy. and then, your father did something snape could never forgive.?
?what??
?he saved his life.?
?what??
  ?yes . . .? said dumbledore dreamily. ?funny, the way people?s minds work, isn?t it? professor snape couldn?t bear being in your father?s debt. . . . i do believe he worked so hard to protect you this year because he felt that would make him and your father even. then he could go back to hating your father?s memory in
?
peace. . . .
  harry tried to understand this but it made his head pound, so he stopped.
?and sir, there?s one more thing . . .?
?just the one??
?how did i get the stone out of the mirror??
  ?ah, now, i?m glad you asked me that. it was one of my more brilliant ideas, and between you and me, that?s saying something. you see, only one who wanted to find the stone ? find it, but not use it ? would be able to get it, otherwise they?d just see them-selves making gold or drinking elixir of life. my brain surprises even me sometimes. . . . now, enough questions. i suggest you make a start on these sweets. ah! bertie bott?s every flavor beans! i was unfortunate enough in my youth to come across a vomit-flavored one, and since then i?m afraid i?ve rather lost my liking for them ? but i think i?ll be safe with a nice toffee, don?t you??

  he smiled and popped the golden-brown bean into his mouth. then he choked and said, ?alas! ear wax!?
madam pomfrey, the nurse, was a nice woman, but very strict. ?just five minutes,? harry pleaded.
?absolutely not.?
?you let professor dumbledore in. . . .?
  ?well, of course, that was the headmaster, quite different. you need rest.?
  ?i am resting, look, lying down and everything. oh, go on, madam pomfrey . . .?
?oh, very well,? she said. ?but five minutes only.?
and she let ron and hermione in.
?harry!?
hermione looked ready to fling her arms around him again, but harry was glad she held herself in as his head was still very sore.
  ?oh, harry, we were sure you were going to ? dumbledore was so worried ??
  ?the whole school?s talking about it,? said ron. ?what realy happened??
  it was one of those rare occasions when the true story is even more strange and exciting than the wild rumors. harry told them everything: quirrell; the mirror; the stone; and voldemort. ron and hermione were a very good audience; they gasped in all the right places, and when harry told them what was under quirrell?s turban, hermione screamed out loud.
  ?so the stone?s gone?? said ron finally. ?flamel?s just going to die??
?that?s what i said, but dumbledore thinks that ? what was

it? ? ?to the well-organized mind, death is but the next great ad-venture. ? ?
  ?i always said he was off his rocker,? said ron, looking quite impressed at how crazy his hero was.
?so what happened to you two?? said harry.
  ?well, i got back all right,? said hermione. ?i brought ron round ? that took a while ? and we were dashing up to the owlery to contact dumbledore when we met him in the entrance hall ? he already knew ? he just said, ?harry?s gone after him, hasn?t he?? and hurtled off to the third floor.?
  ?d?you think he meant you to do it?? said ron. ?sending you your fathers cloak and everything??
  ?wel,? hermione exploded, ?if he did ? i mean to say ? that?s terrible ? you could have been killed.?
  ?no, it isn?t,? said harry thoughtfully. ?he?s a funny man, dumbledore. i think he sort of wanted to give me a chance. i think he knows more or less everything that goes on here, you know. i reckon he had a pretty good idea we were going to try, and instead of stopping us, he just taught us enough to help. i don?t think it was an accident he let me find out how the mirror worked. it?s al-most like he thought i had the right to face voldemort if i could. . . .?
  ?yeah, dumbledore?s off his rocker, all right,? said ron proudly. ?listen, you?ve got to be up for the end-of-year feast tomorrow. the points are all in and slytherin won, of course ? you missed the last quidditch match, we were steamrollered by ravenclaw without you ? but the food?ll be good.?
at that moment, madam pomfrey bustled over.
?you?ve had nearly fifteen minutes, now out,? she said firmly.

~ ~ ~
after a good night?s sleep, harry felt nearly back to normal.
  ?i want to go to the feast,? he told madam pomfrey as she straightened his many candy boxes. ?i can, can?t i??
  ?professor dumbledore says you are to be allowed to go,? she said sniffily, as though in her opinion professor dumbledore didn?t realize how risky feasts could be. ?and you have another visitor.?
?oh, good,? said harry. ?who is it??
  hagrid sidled through the door as he spoke. as usual when he was indoors, hagrid looked too big to be allowed. he sat down next to harry, took one look at him, and burst into tears.
  ?it?s ? all ? my ? ruddy ? fault!? he sobbed, his face in his hands. ?i told the evil git how ter get past fluffy! i told him! it was the only thing he didn?t know, an? i told him! yeh could?ve died! all fer a dragon egg! i?ll never drink again! i should be chucked out an? made ter live as a muggle!?
  ?hagrid!? said harry, shocked to see hagrid shaking with grief and remorse, great tears leaking down into his beard. ?hagrid, he?d have found out somehow, this is voldemort we?re talking about, he?d have found out even if you hadn?t told him.?
?yeh could?ve died!? sobbed hagrid. ?an? don? say the name!?
  ?voldemort!? harry bellowed, and hagrid was so shocked, he stopped crying. ?i?ve met him and i?m calling him by his name. please cheer up, hagrid, we saved the stone, it?s gone, he can?t use it. have a chocolate frog, i?ve got loads. . . .?
  hagrid wiped his nose on the back of his hand and said, ?that reminds me. i?ve got yeh a present.?
  ?it?s not a stoat sandwich, is it?? said harry anxiously, and at last hagrid gave a weak chuckle.

?nah. dumbledore gave me the day off yesterday ter fix it. ?course, he shoulda sacked me instead ? anyway, got yeh this . . .?
  it seemed to be a handsome, leather-covered book. harry opened it curiously. it was full of wizard photographs. smiling and waving at him from every page were his mother and father.
  ?sent owls off ter all yer parents? old school friends, askin? fer photos . . . knew yeh didn? have any . . . d?yeh like it??
harry couldn?t speak, but hagrid understood.
harry made his way down to the end-of-year feast alone that night. he had been held up by madam pomfrey?s fussing about, insisting on giving him one last checkup, so the great hall was already full. it was decked out in the slytherin colors of green and silver to celebrate slytherin?s winning the house cup for the seventh year in a row. a huge banner showing the slytherin serpent covered the wall behind the high table.
  when harry walked in there was a sudden hush, and then everybody started talking loudly at once. he slipped into a seat between ron and hermione at the gryffindor table and tried to ignore the fact that people were standing up to look at him.
  fortunately, dumbledore arrived moments later. the babble died away.
  ?another year gone!? dumbledore said cheerfully. ?and i must trouble you with an old man?s wheezing waffle before we sink our teeth into our delicious feast. what a year it has been! hopefully your heads are all a little fuller than they were . . . you have the whole summer ahead to get them nice and empty before next year starts. . . .

  ?now, as i understand it, the house cup here needs awarding, and the points stand thus: in fourth place, gryffindor, with three hundred and twelve points; in third, hufflepuff, with three hundred and fifty-two; ravenclaw has four hundred and twenty-six and slytherin, four hundred and seventy-two.?
  a storm of cheering and stamping broke out from the slytherin table. harry could see draco malfoy banging his goblet on the table. it was a sickening sight.
  ?yes, yes, well done, slytherin,? said dumbledore. ?however, re-cent events must be taken into account.?
 the room went very still. the slytherins? smiles faded a little. ?ahem,? said dumbledore. ?i have a few last-minute points to dish out. let me see. yes . . .
?first ? to mr. ronald weasley . . .?
  ron went purple in the face; he looked like a radish with a bad sunburn.
  ?. . . for the best-played game of chess hogwarts has seen in many years, i award gryffindor house fifty points.?
  gryffindor cheers nearly raised the bewitched ceiling; the stars overhead seemed to quiver. percy could be heard telling the other prefects, ?my brother, you know! my youngest brother! got past mcgonagall?s giant chess set!?
at last there was silence again.
  ?second ? to miss hermione granger . . . for the use of cool logic in the face of fire, i award gryffindor house fifty points.?
  hermione buried her face in her arms; harry strongly suspected she had burst into tears. gryffindors up and down the table were beside themselves ? they were a hundred points up.

  ?third ? to mr. harry potter . . .? said dumbledore. the room went deadly quiet. ?. . . for pure nerve and outstanding courage, i award gryffindor house sixty points.?
  the din was deafening. those who could add up while yelling themselves hoarse knew that gryffindor now had four hundred and seventy-two points ? exactly the same as slytherin. they had tied for the house cup ? if only dumbledore had given harry just one more point.
dumbledore raised his hand. the room gradually fell silent.
  ?there are all kinds of courage,? said dumbledore, smiling. ?it takes a great deal of bravery to stand up to our enemies, but just as much to stand up to our friends. i therefore award ten points to mr. neville longbottom.?
  someone standing outside the great hall might well have thought some sort of explosion had taken place, so loud was the noise that erupted from the gryffindor table. harry, ron, and hermione stood up to yell and cheer as neville, white with shock, disappeared under a pile of people hugging him. he had never won so much as a point for gryffindor before. harry, still cheering, nudged ron in the ribs and pointed at malfoy, who couldn?t have looked more stunned and horrified if he?d just had the body-bind curse put on him.
  ?which means,? dumbledore called over the storm of applause, for even ravenclaw and hufflepuff were celebrating the downfall of slytherin, ?we need a little change of decoration.?
  he clapped his hands. in an instant, the green hangings became scarlet and the silver became gold; the huge slytherin serpent vanished and a towering gryffindor lion took its place. snape was

shaking professor mcgonagall?s hand, with a horrible, forced smile. he caught harry?s eye and harry knew at once that snape?s feelings toward him hadn?t changed one jot. this didn?t worry harry. it seemed as though life would be back to normal next year, or as normal as it ever was at hogwarts.
  it was the best evening of harry?s life, better than winning at quidditch, or christmas, or knocking out mountain trolls . . . he would never, ever forget tonight.
harry had almost forgotten that the exam results were still to come, but come they did. to their great surprise, both he and ron passed with good marks; hermione, of course, had the best grades of the first years. even neville scraped through, his good herbology mark making up for his abysmal potions one. they had hoped that goyle, who was almost as stupid as he was mean, might be thrown out, but he had passed, too. it was a shame, but as ron said, you couldn?t have everything in life.
  and suddenly, their wardrobes were empty, their trunks were packed, neville?s toad was found lurking in a corner of the toilets; notes were handed out to all students, warning them not to use magic over the holidays (?i always hope they?ll forget to give us these,? said fred weasley sadly); hagrid was there to take them down to the fleet of boats that sailed across the lake; they were boarding the hogwarts express; talking and laughing as the countryside became greener and tidier; eating bertie bott?s every flavor beans as they sped past muggle towns; pulling off their wizard robes and putting on jackets and coats; pulling into platform nine and three-quarters at king?s cross station.

  it took quite a while for them all to get off the platform. a wizened old guard was up by the ticket barrier, letting them go through the gate in twos and threes so they didn?t attract attention by all bursting out of a solid wall at once and alarming the muggles.
  ?you must come and stay this summer,? said ron, ?both of you ? i ?ll send you an owl.?
 ?thanks,? said harry, ?i?ll need something to look forward to.? people jostled them as they moved forward toward the gateway back to the muggle world. some of them called:
?bye, harry!?
?see you, potter!?
?still famous,? said ron, grinning at him.
?not where i?m going, i promise you,? said harry.
he, ron, and hermione passed through the gateway together. ?there he is, mom, there he is, look!?
  it was ginny weasley, ron?s younger sister, but she wasn?t pointing at ron.
?harry potter!? she squealed. ?look, mom! i can see ?? ?be quiet, ginny, and it?s rude to point.?
mrs. weasley smiled down at them.
?busy year?? she said.
  ?very,? said harry. ?thanks for the fudge and the sweater, mrs. weasley.?
?oh, it was nothing, dear.?
?ready, are you??
it was uncle vernon, still purple-faced, still mustached, still looking furious at the nerve of harry, carrying an owl in a cage in

a station full of ordinary people. behind him stood aunt petunia and dudley, looking terrified at the very sight of harry.
?you must be harry?s family!? said mrs. weasley.
  ?in a manner of speaking,? said uncle vernon. ?hurry up, boy, we haven?t got all day.? he walked away.
harry hung back for a last word with ron and hermione. ?see you over the summer, then.?
  ?hope you have ? er ? a good holiday,? said hermione, looking uncertainly after uncle vernon, shocked that anyone could be so unpleasant.
  ?oh, i will,? said harry, and they were surprised at the grin that was spreading over his face. ?they don?t know we?re not allowed to use magic at home. i?m going to have a lot of fun with dudley this summer. . . .?



this book
was art directed by
david saylor and designed by becky
terhune. the art for both the jacket and interior was
created using pastels on toned printmaking paper. the text was
set in 12-point adobe garamond, a typeface based on the sixteenth
century type designs of claude garamond redrawn by robert
slimbach in 1989. the book was pri nted and bound
at rr donneley & sons, wilard, oh.
the production was supervised by
angela biola
2010: odyssey two

arthur c. clarke 1982




    leonov

    1

    meeting at the focus


    even in this metric age, it was still the thousand-foot telescope, not the 
three-hundred-metre one. the great saucer set among the mountains was already 
half full of shadow, as the tropical sun dropped swiftly to rest, but the 
triangular raft of the antenna complex suspended high above its centre still 
blazed with light. from the ground far below, it would have taken keen eyes to 
notice the two human figures in the aerial maze of girders, support cables, and 
wave-guides.

    'the time has come,' said dr dimitri moisevitch to his old friend heywood 
floyd, 'to talk of many things. of shoes and spaceships and sealing wax, but 
mostly of monoliths and malfunctioning computers.'

    'so that's why you got me away from the conference. not that i really mind - 
i've heard carl give that seti speech so many times that i can recite it myself. 
and the view certainly is fantastic - you know, all the times i've been to 
arecibo, i've never made it up here to the antenna feed.'

    'shame on you. i've been here three times. imagine - we're listening to the 
whole universe - but no one can overhear us. so let's talk about your problem.'

    'what problem?'

    'to start with, why you had to resign as chairman of the national council on 
astronautics.'

    'i didn't resign. the university of hawaii pays a lot better.'

    'okay - you didn't resign - you were one jump ahead of them. after all these 
years, woody, you can't fool me, and you should give up trying. if they offered 
the nca back to you right now, would you hesitate?'

    'all right, you old cossak. what do you want to know?'

    'first of all, there are lots of loose ends in the report you finally issued 
after so much prodding. we'll overlook the ridiculous and frankly illegal 
secrecy with which your people dug up the tycho monolith -'

    'that wasn't my idea.'

    'glad to hear it: i even believe you. and we appreciate the fact that you're 
now letting everyone examine the thing - which of course is what you should have 
done in the first place. not that it's done much good...'

    there was a gloomy silence while the two men contemplated the black enigma 
up there on the moon, still contemptuously defying all the weapons that human 
ingenuity could bring to bear upon it. then the russian scientist continued.

    'anyway, whatever the tycho monolith may be, there's something more 
important out at jupiter. that's where it sent its signal, after all. and that's 
where your people ran into trouble. sorry about that, by the way - though frank 
poole was the only one i knew personally. met him at the '98 iaf congress - he 
seemed a good man.'

    'thank you; they were all good men. i wish we knew what happened to them.'

    'whatever it was, surely you'll admit that it now concerns the whole human 
race - not merely the united states. you can no longer try to use your knowledge 
for purely national advantage.'

    'dimitri - you know perfectly well that your side would have done exactly 
the same thing. and you'd have helped.' 

    'you're absolutely right. but that's ancient history - like the just-
departed administration of yours that was responsible for the whole mess. with a 
new president, perhaps wiser counsels will prevail.'

    'possibly. do you have any suggestions, and are they official or just 
personal hopes?'

    'entirely unofficial at the moment. what the bloody politicians call 
exploratory talks. which i shall flatly deny ever occurred.'

    'fair enough. go on.'

    'okay - here's the situation. you're assembling discovery 2 in parking orbit 
as quickly as you can, but you can't hope to have it ready in less than three 
years, which means you'll miss the next launch window -,

    'i neither confirm nor deny. remember i'm merely a humble university 
chancellor, the other side of the world from the astronautics council.'

    'and your last trip to washington was just a holiday to see old friends, i 
suppose. to continue: our own alexei leonov -,

    'i thought you were calling it gherman titov.'

    'wrong, chancellor. the dear old cia's let you down again. leonov it is, as 
of last january. and don't let anyone know i told you it will reach jupiter at 
least a year ahead of discovery.'

    'don't let anyone know i told you we were afraid of that. but do go on.'

    'because my bosses are just as stupid and shortsighted as yours, they want 
to go it alone. which means that whatever went wrong with you may happen to us, 
and we'll all be back to square one - or worse.'

    'what do you think went wrong? we're just as baffled as you are. and don't 
tell me you haven't got all of dave bowman's transmissions.'

    'of course we have. right up to that last "my god, it's full of stars!" 
we've even done a stress analysis on his voice patterns. we don't think he was 
hallucinating; he was trying to describe what he actually saw.'

    'and what do you make of his doppler shift?'

    'completely impossible, of course. when we lost his signal, he was receding 
at a tenth of the speed of light. and he'd reached that in less than two 
minutes. a quarter of a million gravities!'

    'so he must have been killed instantly.'

    'don't pretend to be naive, woody. your space-pod radios aren't built to 
withstand even a hundredth of that acceleration. if they could survive, so could 
bowman - at least, until we lost contact.'

    'just doing an independent check on your deductions. from there on, we're as 
much in the dark as you are. if you are.'

    'merely playing with lots of crazy guesses i'd be ashamed to tell you. yet 
none of them, i suspect, will be half as crazy as the truth.'

    in small crimson explosions the navigation warning lights winked on all 
around them, and the three slim towers supporting the antenna complex began to 
blaze like beacons against the darkling sky. the last red sliver of the sun 
vanished below the surrounding hills; heywood floyd waited for the green flash, 
which he had never seen. once again, he was disappointed.

    'so, dimitri,' he said, 'let's get to the point. just what are you driving 
at?'

    'there must be a vast amount of priceless information stored in discovery's 
data banks; presumably it's still being gathered, even though the ship's stopped 
transmitting. we'd like to have that.'

    'fair enough. but when you get out there, and leonov makes a rendezvous, 
what's to prevent you from boarding discovery and copying everything you want?'

    'i never thought i'd have to remind you that discovery is united states 
territory, and an unauthorized entry would be piracy.'

    'except in the event of a life-or-death emergency, which wouldn't be 
difficult to arrange. after all, it would be hard for us to check what your boys 
were up to, from a billion kilometres away.'

    'thanks for the most interesting suggestion; i'll pass it on. but even if we 
went aboard, it would take us weeks to learn all your systems, and read out all 
your memory banks. what i propose is cooperation. i'm convinced that's the best 
idea - but we may both have a job selling it to our respective bosses.'

    'you want one of our astronauts to fly with leonov?'

    'yes - preferably an engineer who's specialized in discovery's systems. like 
the ones you're training at houston to bring the ship home.'

    'how did you know that?'

    'for heaven's sake, woody - it was on aviation week's videotext at least a 
month ago.'

    'i am out of touch; nobody tells me what's been declassified.'

    'all the more reason to spend time in washington. will you back me up?'

    'absolutely. i agree with you one hundred per cent. but -'

    'but what?'

    'we both have to deal with dinosaurs with brains in their tails. some of 
mine will argue: let the russians risk their necks, hurrying out to jupiter. 
we'll be there anyway a couple of years later - and what's the hurry?'

    for a moment there was silence on the antenna raft, except for a faint creak 
from the immense supporting cables that held it suspended a hundred metres in 
the sky. then moisevitch continued, so quietly that floyd had to strain to hear 
him: 'has anyone checked discovery's orbit lately?'

    'i really don't know - but i suppose so. anyway, why bother? it's a 
perfectly stable one.'

    'indeed. let me tactlessly remind you of an embarrassing incident from the 
old nasa days. your first space station - skylab. it was supposed to stay up at 
least a decade, but you didn't do your calculations right. the air drag in the 
ionosphere was badly underestimated, and it came down years ahead of schedule. 
i'm sure you remember that little cliffhanger, even though you were a boy at the 
time.'

    'it was the year i graduated, and you know it. but discovery doesn't go 
anywhere near jupiter. even at perigee - er, perijove - it's much too high to be 
affected by atmospheric drag.'

    'i've already said enough to get me exiled to my dacha again - and you might 
not be allowed to visit me next time. so just ask your tracking people to do 
their job more carefully, will you? and remind them that jupiter has the biggest 
magnetosphere in the solar system.'

    'i understand what you're driving at - many thanks. anything else before we 
go down? i'm starting to freeze.'

    'don't worry, old friend. as soon as you let all this filter through to 
washington - wait a week or so until i'm clear -things are going to get very, 
very hot.'



    2

    the house of the dolphins



    the dolphins swam into the dining room every evening, just before sunset. 
only once since floyd had occupied the chancellor's residence had they broken 
their routine. that was the day of the '05 tsunami, which, fortunately, had lost 
most of its power before it reached hilo. the next time his friends failed to 
turn up on schedule, floyd would throw the family into the car and head for high 
ground, in the general direction of mauna kea.

    charming though they were, he had to admit that their playfulness was 
sometimes a nuisance. the wealthy marine geologist who had designed the house 
had never minded getting wet because he usually wore bathing trunks - or less. 
but there had been one unforgettable occasion when the entire board of regents, 
in full evening attire, had been sipping cocktails around the pool while 
awaiting the arrival of a distinguished guest from the mainland. the dolphins 
had deduced, correctly, that they would get second billing. so the visitor was 
quite surprised to be greeted by a bedraggled committee in ill-fitting bathrobes 
- and the buffet had been very salty.

    floyd often wondered what marion would have thought of his strange and 
beautiful home on the edge of the pacific. she had never liked the sea, but the 
sea had won in the end. though the image was slowly fading, he could still 
recall the flashing screen on which he had first read the words: dr floyd - 
urgent and personal. and then the scrolling lines of fluorescent print that had 
swiftly burned their message into his mind:



    regret to inform you london-washington flight 452 reported down off 
newfoundland. rescue craft proceeding to location but fear no survivors.



    apart from an accident of fate, he would have been on that flight. for a few 
days, he had almost regretted the european space administration business that 
had delayed him in paris; that haggle over the solaris payload had saved his 
life.

    and now, he had a new job, a new home and a new wife. fate had also played 
an ironic role here. the recriminations and inquiries over the jupiter mission 
had destroyed his washington career, but a man of his ability was never 
unemployed for long. the more leisurely tempo of university life had always 
appealed to him, and when combined with one of the world's most beautiful 
locations it had proved irresistible. he had met the woman who was to be his 
second wife only a month after he had been appointed, while watching the fire 
fountains of kilauea with a crowd of tourists.

    with caroline he had found the contentment that is just as important as 
happiness, and longer lasting. she had been a good stepmother to marion's two 
daughters, and had given him christopher. despite the twenty-year age difference 
between them, she understood his moods and could wean him out of his occasional 
depressions. thanks to her, he could now contemplate the memory of marion 
without grief, though not without a wistful sadness that would remain with him 
for the rest of his life.

    caroline was throwing fish to the largest dolphin - the big male they called 
scarback - when a gentle tickling on floyd's wrist announced an incoming call. 
he tapped the slim metal band to quench the silent alarm and forestall the 
audible one, then walked to the nearest of the comsets scattered around the 
room.

    'chancellor here. who's calling?'

    'heywood? this is victor. how are you?'

    in a fraction of a second, a whole kaleidoscope of emotions flashed through 
floyd's mind. first there was annoyance: his successor - and, he was sure, 
principal contriver of his downfall - had never once attempted to contact him 
since his departure from washington. then came curiosity: what did they have to 
talk about? next was a stubborn determination to be as unhelpful as possible, 
then shame at his own childishness, and, finally, a surge of excitement. victor 
millson could be calling for only one reason.

    in as neutral a voice as he could muster, floyd answered:

    'i can't complain, victor. what's the problem?'

    'is this a secure circuit?'

    'no, thank god. i don't need them any more.'

    'um. well, i'll put it this way. you recall the last project you 
administered?'

    'i'm not likely to forget, especially as the subcommittee on astronautics 
called me back to give more evidence only a month ago.'

    'of course, of course. i really must get around to reading your statement, 
when i have a moment. but i've been so busy with the follow-up, and that's the 
problem.'

    'i thought that everything was right on schedule.'

    'it is - unfortunately. there's nothing we can do to advance it; even the 
highest priority would make only a few weeks' difference. and that means we'll 
be too late.'

    'i don't understand,' said floyd innocently. 'though we don't want to waste 
time, of course, there's no real deadline.'

    'now there is - and two of them.'

    'you amaze me.'

    if victor noticed any irony, he ignored it. 'yes, there are two deadlines - 
one man-made, one not. it now turns out that we won't be the first to get back 
to the - er, scene of the action. our old rivals will beat us by at least a 
year.'

    'too bad.'

    'that's not the worst. even if there were no competition, we'd be too late. 
there wouldn't be anything there when we arrive.'

    'that's ridiculous. i'm sure i'd have heard if congress had repealed the law 
of gravitation.'

    'i'm serious. the situation isn't stable - i can't give details now. will 
you be in for the rest of the evening?'

    'yes,' floyd answered, realizing with some pleasure that it must now be well 
after midnight in washington.

    'good. you'll have a package delivered within the hour. call me back as soon 
as you've had the time to study it.'

    'won't it be rather late by then?'

    'yes, it will be. but we've wasted too much time already. i don't want to 
lose any more.'

    millson was true to his word. exactly an hour later a large sealed envelope 
was delivered by an air force colonel, no less, who sat patiently chatting with 
caroline while floyd read its contents. 'i'm afraid i'll have to take it away 
when you've finished,' the high-ranking messenger boy said apologetically.

    'i'm glad to hear it,' floyd answered, as he settled down in his favourite 
reading hammock.

    there were two documents, the first very short. it was stamped top secret, 
though the top had been crossed out and the modification endorsed by three 
signatures, all completely illegible. obviously an extract from some much longer 
report, it had been heavily censored and was full of blanks, which made it most 
annoying to read. fortunately, its conclusions could be summed up in one 
sentence: the russians would reach discovery long before its rightful owners 
could do so. as floyd already knew this, he turned quickly to the second 
document - though not before noticing with satisfaction that this time they'd 
managed to get the name right. as usual, dimitri had been perfectly accurate. 
the next manned expedition to jupiter would travel aboard spacecraft cosmonaut 
alexei leonov.

    the second document was much longer and was merely confidential; indeed, it 
was in the form of a draft letter to science, awaiting final approval before 
publication. its snappy title was 'space vehicle discovery: anomalous orbital 
behavior'.

    then followed a dozen pages of mathematics and astronomical tables. floyd 
skimmed through these, picking out the words from the music, and trying to 
detect any note of apology or even embarrassment. when he had finished, he was 
compelled to give a smile of wry admiration. no one could possibly guess that 
the tracking stations and ephemeris calculators had been caught by surprise, and 
that a frantic cover-up was in progress. heads would doubtless roll, and he knew 
that victor millson would enjoy rolling them - if his was not one of the first 
to go. though to do him justice, victor had complained when congress had cut 
funds for the tracking network. maybe that would get him off the hook.

    'thank you, colonel,' said floyd when he had finished skimming the papers. 
'quite like old times, having classified documents. that's one thing i don't 
miss.'

    the colonel placed the envelope carefully back in his briefcase, and 
activated the locks.

    'dr millson would like you to return his call as soon as possible.'

    'i know. but i don't have a secure circuit, i've some important visitors 
coming shortly, and i'm damned if i'm driving down to your office in hilo just 
to say i've read two documents. tell him that i've studied them carefully and 
await any further communication with interest.'

    for a moment it looked as if the colonel was going to argue. then he thought 
better of it, made a stiff farewell, and departed morosely into the night.

    'now, what was all that about?' asked caroline. 'we're not expecting any 
visitors tonight, important or otherwise.'

    'i hate being pushed around, particularly by victor millson.'

    'bet he calls you back as soon as the colonel reports.'

    'then we must switch off video and make some party noises. but to be 
perfectly truthful, at this stage i really don't have anything to say.'

    'about what, if i'm allowed to ask.'

    'sorry, dear. it seems that discovery is playing tricks on us. we thought 
the ship was in a stable orbit, but it may be about to crash.'

    'into jupiter?'

    'oh no - that's quite impossible. bowman left it parked at the inner 
lagrange point, on the line between jupiter and io. it should have stayed there, 
more or less, though the perturbations of the outer moons would have made it 
wander back and forth.

    'but what's happening now is something very odd, and we don't know the full 
explanation. discovery's drifting more and more rapidly toward io - though 
sometimes it accelerates, and sometimes even moves backward. if it keeps this 
up, it will impact within two or three years.'

    'i thought this couldn't happen in astronomy. isn't celestial mechanics 
supposed to be an exact science? so we poor backward biologists were always 
being told.'

    'it is an exact science, when everything is taken into account. but some 
very strange things go on around io. apart from its volcanoes, there are 
tremendous electrical discharges - and jupiter's magnetic field is spinning 
round every ten hours. so gravitation isn't the only force acting on discovery; 
we should have thought of this sooner - much sooner.'

    'well, it's not your problem anymore. you should be thankful for that.'

    'your problem' - the very expression that dimitri had used. and dimitri - 
cunning old fox! - had known him much longer than caroline.

    it might not be his problem, but it was still his responsibility. though 
many others had been involved, in the final analysis he had approved the plans 
for the jupiter mission, and supervised their execution.

    even at the time, he had had qualms; his views as a scientist had conflicted 
with his duties as a bureaucrat. he could have spoken out, and opposed the old 
administration's shortsighted policies - though to what extent those had 
actually contributed to the disaster was still uncertain.

    perhaps it was best if he closed this chapter of his life, and focused all 
his thoughts and energies upon his new career. but in his heart he knew that was 
impossible; even if dimitri had not revived old guilts, they would have surfaced 
of their own accord.

    four men had died, and one had disappeared, out there among the moons of 
jupiter. there was blood on his hands, and he did not know how to wash them 
clean.



    3

    sal 9000



    dr sivasubramanian chandrasegarampillai, professor of computer science at 
the university of illinois, urbana, also had an abiding sense of guilt, but one 
very different from heywood floyd's. those of his students and colleagues who 
often wondered if the little scientist was quite human would not have been 
surprised to learn that he never thought of the dead astronauts. dr chandra 
grieved only for his lost child, hal 9000.

    even after all these years, and his endless reviews of the data radioed back 
from discovery, he was not sure what had gone wrong. he could only formulate 
theories; the facts he needed were frozen in hal's circuits, out there between 
jupiter and io.

    the sequence of events had been clearly established, up to the moment of the 
tragedy; thereafter, commander bowman had filled in a few more details on the 
brief occasions when he had re-established contact. but knowing what happened 
did not explain why.

    the first hint of trouble had been late in the mission, when hal had 
reported the imminent failure of the unit that kept discovery's main antenna 
aligned to earth. if the half-billion-kilometre-long radio beam wandered off 
target, the ship would be blind, deaf, and dumb.

    bowman himself had gone out to retrieve the suspect unit, but when it was 
tested it appeared, to everyone's surprise, to be in perfectly good order. the 
automatic checking circuits could find nothing wrong with it. nor could hal's 
twin, sal 9000, back on earth, when the information was transmitted to urbana.

    but hal had insisted on the accuracy of his diagnosis, making pointed 
remarks about 'human error'. he had suggested that the control unit be put back 
in the antenna until it finally failed, so that the fault could be precisely 
located. no one could think of any objection, for the unit could be replaced in 
minutes, even if it did break down.

    bowman and poole, however, had not been happy; they both felt that something 
was wrong, though neither could pinpoint it. for months they had accepted hal as 
the third member of their tiny world, and knew his every mood. then the 
atmosphere aboard the ship had subtly altered; there was a sense of strain in 
the air.

    feeling rather like traitors - as a distraught bowman had later reported to 
mission control - the human two-thirds of the crew had discussed what should be 
done if their colleague was indeed malfunctioning. in the worst possible case, 
hal would have to be relieved of all his higher responsibilities. this would 
involve disconnection - the computer equivalent of death.

    despite their doubts, they had carried out the agreed programme. poole had 
flown out of discovery in one of the little space pods that served as 
transporters and mobile workshops during extravehicular activities. since the 
somewhat tricky job of replacing the antenna unit could not be performed by the 
pod's own manipulators, poole had started to do it himself.

    what happened then had been missed by the external cameras, which was a 
suspicious detail in itself. bowman's first warning of disaster was a cry from 
poole - then, silence. a moment later he saw poole, tumbling over and over, 
spinning away into space. his own pod had rammed him, and was itself blasting 
away out of control.

    as bowman admitted later, he had then made several serious mistakes - all 
but one excusable. in the hope of rescuing poole, if he was still alive, bowman 
launched himself in another space pod - leaving hal in full control of the ship.

    the eva was in vain; poole was dead when bowman reached him. numb with 
despair, he had carried the body back to the ship - only to be refused entry by 
hal.

    but hal had underestimated human ingenuity and determination. though he had 
left his suit helmet in the ship, and thus had to risk direct exposure to space, 
bowman forced his way in by an emergency hatch not under computer control. then 
he proceeded to lobotomize hal, unplugging his brain modules one by one.

    when he regained control of the ship, bowman made an appalling discovery. 
during his absence, hal had switched off the life-support systems of the three 
hibernating astronauts. bowman was alone, as no man had ever been before in the 
whole of human history.

    others might have abandoned themselves in helpless despair, but now david 
bowman proved that those who had selected him had indeed chosen well. he managed 
to keep discovery operational, and even re-established intermittent contact with 
mission control, by orienting the whole ship so that the jammed antenna pointed 
toward earth.

    on its preordained trajectory, discovery had finally arrived at jupiter. 
there bowman had encountered, orbiting among the moons of the giant planet, a 
black slab of exactly the same shape as the monolith excavated in the lunar 
crater tycho - but hundreds of times larger. he had gone out in a space pod to 
investigate, and had disappeared leaving that final, baffling message: 'my god, 
it's full of stars!'

    that mystery was for others to worry about; dr chandra's overwhelming 
concern was with hal. if there was one thing his unemotional mind hated, it was 
uncertainty. he would never be satisfied until he knew the cause of hal's 
behaviour. even now, he refused to call it a malfunction; at most, it was an 
'anomaly'.

    the tiny cubbyhole he used as his inner sanctum was equipped only with a 
swivel chair, a desk console, and a blackboard flanked by two photographs. few 
members of the general public could have identified the portraits, but anyone 
permitted thus far would have recognized them instantly as john von neumann and 
alan turing, the twin gods of the computing pantheon.

    there were no books, and not even paper and pencil on the desk. all the 
volumes in all the libraries of the world were instantly available at the touch 
of chandra's fingers, and the visual display was his sketchbook and writing pad. 
even the blackboard was used only for visitors; the last half - erased block 
diagram upon it bore a date already three weeks in the past.

    dr chandra lit one of the venomous cheroots which he imported from madras, 
and which were widely - and correctly - believed to be his only vice. the 
console was never switched off he checked that no messages were flashing 
importantly on the display, then spoke into the microphone.

    'good morning, sal. so you've nothing new for me?'

    'no, dr chandra. have you anything for me?'

    the voice might have been that of any cultured hindu lady educated in the 
united states as well as her own country. sal's accent had not started that way, 
but over the years she had picked up many of chandra's intonations.

    the scientist tapped out a code on the board, switching sal's inputs to the 
memory with the highest security rating. no one knew that he talked to the 
computer on this circuit as he never could to a human being. no matter that sal 
did not really understand more than a fraction of what he said; her responses 
were so convincing that even her creator was sometimes deceived. as indeed he 
wished to be: these secret communications helped to preserve his mental 
equilibrium - perhaps even his sanity.

    'you've often told me, sal, that we cannot solve the problem of hal's 
anomalous behaviour without more information. but how can we get that 
information?'

    'that is obvious. someone must return to discovery.'

    'exactly. now it looks as if that is going to happen, sooner than we 
expected.'

    'i am pleased to hear that.'

    'i knew that you would be,' answered chandra, and meant it. he had long 
since broken off communications with the dwindling body of philosophers who 
argued that computers could not really feel emotions, but only pretended to do 
so.

    ('if you can prove to me that you're not pretending to be annoyed,' he had 
once retorted scornfully to one such critic, 'i'll take you seriously.' at that 
point, his opponent had put on a most convincing imitation of anger.)

    'now i want to explore another possibility,' chandra continued. 'diagnosis 
is only the first step. the process is incomplete unless it leads to a cure.'

    'you believe that hal can be restored to normal functioning?'

    'i hope so. i do not know. there may have been irreversible damage, and 
certainly major loss of memory.'

    he paused thoughtfully, took several puffs, then blew a skilful smoke ring 
that scored a bull's-eye on sal's wideangle lens. a human being would not have 
regarded this as a friendly gesture; that was yet another of the many advantages 
of computers.

    'i need your cooperation, sal.'

    'of course, dr chandra.'

    'there may be certain risks.'

    'what do you mean?'

    'i propose to disconnect some of your circuits, particularly those involving 
your higher functions. does this disturb you?'

    'i am unable to answer that without more specific information.'

    'very well. let me put it this way. you have operated continuously, have you 
not, since you were first switched on?'

    'that is correct.'

    'but you are aware that we human beings cannot do so. we require sleep - an 
almost complete break in our mental functioning, at least on the conscious 
level.'

    'i know this. but i do not understand it.'

    'well, you may be about to experience something like sleep. probably all 
that will happen is that time will pass, but you will be unaware out. when you 
check your internal clock, you will discover that there are gaps in your monitor 
record. that is all.'

    'but you said that there might be risks. what are they?'

    'there is a very slight chance - it is impossible to compute it - that when 
i reconnect your circuits, there may be some changes in your personality, your 
future behaviour patterns. you may feel different. not necessarily better, or 
worse.' 

    'i do not know what that means.'

    'i'm sorry - it may not mean anything. so don't worry about it. now please 
open a new file - here is the name.' using the keyboard input, chandra typed 
out: phoenix.

    'do you know what that is?' he asked sal.

    with no discernible pause the computer replied: 'there are twenty-five 
references in the current encyclopedia.'

    'which one do you think is relevant?'

    'the tutor of achilles?'

    'interesting. i didn't know that one. try again.'

    'a fabulous bird, reborn from the ashes of its earlier life.'

    'excellent. now do you understand why i chose it?'

    'because you hope that hal can be reactivated.'

    'yes - with your assistance. are you ready?'

    'not yet. i would like to ask a question.'

    'what is it?'

    'will i dream?'

    'of course you will. all intelligent creatures dream - but no one knows 
why.' chandra paused for a moment, blew another smoke ring from the cheroot, and 
added something that he would never admit to a human being. 'perhaps you will 
dream about hal - as i often do.'



    4

    mission profile



    english version

    to: captain tatiana (tanya) orlova, commander. spacecraft cosmonaut alexei 
leonov (uncos registration 081342).

    from: national council on astronautics, pennsylvania avenue, washington

    commission on outer space, ussr academy of science, korolyev prospect, 
moscow



    mission objectives

    the objectives of your mission are, in order of priority:

    1. to proceed to the jovian system and rendezvous with us spacecraft 
discovery (uncos 01/283).

    2. to board this spacecraft, and obtain all possible information relating to 
its earlier mission.

    3. to reactivate spacecraft discovery's onboard systems and, if propellant 
supplies are adequate, inject the ship into an earth-returns trajectory.

    4 to locate the alien artifact encountered by discovery, and to investigate 
it to the maximum extent possible by remote sensors.

    5. if it seems advisable, and mission control concurs, to rendezvous with 
this object for closer inspection.

    6. to carry out a survey of jupiter and its satellites, as far as this is 
compatible with the above objectives.



    it is realized that unforeseen circumstances may require a change of 
priorities, or even make it impossible to achieve some of these objectives. it 
must be clearly understood that the rendezvous with spacecraft discovery is for 
the express purpose of obtaining information about the artifact; this must take 
precedence over all other objectives, including attempts at salvage.



    crew

    the crew of spacecraft alexei leonov will consist of:

    captain tatiana orlova (engineering-propulsion)

    dr vasili orlov (navigation-astronomy)

    dr maxim brailovsky (engineering-structures)

    dr alexander kovalev (engineering-communications)

    dr nikolai ternovsky (engineering-control systems)

    surgeon-commander katerina rudenko (medical-life-support)

    dr irma yakunina (medical-nutrition)

    in addition, the us national council on astronautics will provide the 
following three experts:



    dr heywood floyd dropped the memorandum, and leaned back in his chair. it 
was all settled; the point of no return had been passed. even if he wished to do 
so, there was no way to put back the clock.

    he glanced across at caroline, sitting with two-year-old chris on the edge 
of the pool. the boy was more at home in the water than on land, and could stay 
submerged for periods that often terrified visitors. and though he could not yet 
speak much human, he already seemed fluent in dolphin.

    one of christopher's friends had just swum in from the pacific and was 
presenting his back to be patted. you too are a wanderer, thought floyd, in a 
vast and trackless ocean; but how small your tiny pacific seems, against the 
immensity i am facing now!

    caroline became aware of his gaze, and rose to her feet. she looked at him 
sombrely, but without anger; all that had been burned out in the last few days. 
as she approached, she even managed a wistful smile.

    'i've found that poem i was looking for,' she said. 'it starts like this:



    what is a woman that you forsake her, 

    and the hearth-fire and the home acre, 

    to go with the old grey widow-maker?'



    'sorry - i don't quite understand. who is the widow-maker?'

    'not who, what. the sea. the poem's a lament by a viking woman. it was 
written by rudyard kipling, a hundred years ago.'

    floyd took his wife's hand; she did not respond, but neither did she resist.

    'well, i don't feel at all like a viking. i'm not after loot, and adventure 
is the very last thing i want.'

    'then why - no, i don't intend to start another fight. but it would help us 
both, if you know exactly what your motives are.'

    'i wish i could give you one single good reason. instead, i've a whole host 
of little ones. but they add up to a final answer i can't argue with - believe 
me.'

    'i believe you. but are you sure you're not fooling yourself?'

    'if i am, then so are a lot of other people. including, may i remind you, 
the president of the united states.'

    'i'm not likely to forget. but suppose - just suppose - that he hadn't asked 
you. would you have volunteered?'

    'i can answer that truthfully: no. it would never have occurred to me. 
president mordecai's call was the biggest shock of my life. but when i thought 
it over, i realized he was perfectly right. you know i don't go in for false 
modesty. i am the best-qualified man for the job - when the space docs give 
their final okay. and you should know that i'm still in pretty good shape.'

    that brought the smile he had intended.

    'sometimes i wonder if you'd suggested it yourself.'

    the thought had indeed occurred to him; but he could answer honestly.

    'i would never have done so without consulting you.'

    'i'm glad you didn't. i don't know what i'd have said.'

    'i could still turn it down.'

    'now you're talking nonsense, and you know it. even if you did, you'd hate 
me for the rest of your life - and you'd never forgive yourself. you have too 
strong a sense of duty. maybe that's one of the reasons i married you.'

    duty! yes, that was the key word, and what multitudes it contained. he had a 
duty to himself, to his family, to the university, to his past job (even though 
he had left it under a cloud), to his country - and to the human race. it was 
not easy to establish the priorities; and sometimes they conflicted with one 
another.

    there were perfectly logical reasons why he should go on the mission - and 
equally logical reasons, as many of his colleagues had already pointed out, why 
he should not. but perhaps in the final analysis, the choice had been made by 
his heart, not his brain. and even here, emotion urged him in two opposite 
directions.

    curiosity, guilt, the determination to finish a job that had been badly 
botched - they all combined to drive him toward jupiter and whatever might be 
waiting there. on the other hand, fear - he was honest enough to admit that - 
united with love of his family to keep him on earth. yet he had never had any 
real doubts; he had made his decision almost instantly, and had deflected all of 
caroline's arguments as gently as he could.

    and there was one other consoling thought that he had not yet risked sharing 
with his wife. though he would be gone two and a half years, all but the fifty 
days at jupiter would be spent in timeless hibernation. when he returned, the 
gap between their ages would have narrowed by more than two years.

    he would have sacrificed the present so that they could share a longer 
future together.



    5

    leonov



    the months contracted to weeks, the weeks dwindled to days, the days 
shrivelled to hours; and suddenly heywood floyd was once more at the cape - 
spaceward-bound for the first time since that trip to clavius base and the tycho 
monolith, so many years ago.

    but this time he was not alone, and there was no secrecy about the mission. 
a few seats ahead of him rode dr chandra, already engaged in a dialogue with his 
briefcase computer, and quite oblivious to his surroundings.

    one of floyd's secret amusements, which he had never confided to anyone, was 
spotting similarities between human beings and animals. the resemblances were 
more often flattering than insulting, and his little hobby was also a very 
useful aid to memory.

    dr chandra was easy - the adjective birdlike sprang instantly to mind. he 
was tiny, delicate, and all his movements were swift and precise. but which 
bird? obviously a very intelligent one. magpie? too perky and acquisitive. owl? 
no - too slow-moving. perhaps sparrow would do nicely.

    walter curnow, the systems specialist who would have the formidable job of 
getting discovery operational again, was a more difficult matter. he was a 
large, husky man, certainly not at all birdlike. one could usually find a match 
somewhere in the vast spectrum of dogs, but no canine seemed to fit. of course - 
curnow was a bear. not the sulky, dangerous kind, but the friendly good-natured 
type. and perhaps this was appropriate; it reminded floyd of the russian 
colleagues he would soon be joining. they had been up in orbit for days, engaged 
in their final checks.

    this is the great moment of my life, floyd told himself. now i am leaving on 
a mission that may determine the future of the human race. but he did not feel 
any sense of exultation; all he could think of, during the last minutes of the 
countdown, were the words he had whispered just before he had left home: 
'goodbye, my dear little son; will you remember me when i return?' and he still 
felt resentment toward caroline because she would not awaken the sleeping child 
for one final embrace; yet he knew that she had been wise, and it was better 
that way.

    his mood was shattered by a sudden explosive laugh; dr curnow was sharing a 
joke with his companions - as well as a large bottle that he handled as 
delicately as a barely subcritical mass of plutonium.

    'hey, heywood,' he called, 'they tell me captain orlova's locked up all the 
drinks, so this is your last chance. chƒteau thierry '95. sorry about the 
plastic cups.'

    as floyd sipped at the really superb champagne, he found himself cringing 
mentally at the thought of curnow's guffaw reverberating all the way across the 
solar system. much as he admired the engineer's, ability, as a travelling 
companion curnow might prove something of a strain. at least dr chandra would 
not present such problems; floyd could hardly imagine him smiling, let alone 
laughing. and, of course, he turned down the champagne with a barely perceptible 
shudder. curnow was polite enough, or glad enough, not to insist.

    the engineer was, it seemed, determined to be the life and soul of the 
party. a few minutes later he produced a two-octave electronic keyboard, and 
gave rapid renderings of 'd'ye ken john peel' as performed successively by 
piano, trombone, violin, flute, and full organ, with vocal accompaniment. he was 
really very good, and floyd soon found himself singing along with the others. 
but it was just as well, he thought, that curnow would spend most of the voyage 
in silent hibernation.

    the music died with a sudden despairing discord as the engines ignited and 
the shuttle launched itself into the sky. floyd was gripped by a familiar but 
always new exhilaration - the sense of boundless power, carrying him up and away 
from the cares and duties of earth. men knew better than they realized, when 
they placed the abode of the gods beyond the reach of gravity. he was flying 
toward that realm of weightlessness; for the moment, he would ignore the fact 
that out there lay not freedom, but the greatest responsibility of his career.

    as the thrust increased, he felt the weight of worlds upon his shoulders - 
but he welcomed it, like an atlas who had not yet tired of his burden. he did 
not attempt to think, but was content to savour the experience. even if he was 
leaving earth for the last time, and saying farewell to all that he had ever 
loved, he felt no sadness. the roar that surrounded him was a paean of triumph, 
sweeping away all minor emotions.

    he was almost sorry when it ceased, though he welcomed the easier breathing 
and the sudden sense of freedom. most of the other passengers started to 
unbuckle their safety straps, preparing to enjoy the thirty minutes of zero 
gravity during the transfer orbit, but a few who were obviously making the trip 
for the first time remained in their seats, looking around anxiously for the 
cabin attendants.

    'captain speaking. we're now at an altitude of three hundred kilometres, 
coming up over the west coast of africa. you won't see much as it's night down 
there - that glow ahead is sierra leone - and there's a big tropical storm over 
the gulf of guinea. look at those flashes!

    'we'll have sunrise in fifteen minutes. meanwhile i'm rolling the ship so 
you can get a good view of the equatorial satellite belt. the brightest one - 
almost straight overhead - is intelsat's atlantic-1 antenna farm. then 
intercosmos 2 to the west - that fainter star is jupiter. and if you look just 
below that, you'll see a flashing light, moving against the star background - 
that's the new chinese space-station. we pass within a hundred kilometres, not 
close enough to see anything with the naked eye -,

    what were they up to? floyd thought idly. he had examined the close-ups of 
the squat cylindrical structure with its curious bulges, and saw no reason to 
believe the alarmist rumours that it was a laser-equipped fortress. but while 
the beijing academy of science ignored the un space committee's repeated 
requests for a tour of inspection, the chinese only had themselves to blame for 
such hostile propaganda.



    the "cosmonaut alexei leonov" was not a thing of beauty; but few spacecraft 
ever were. one day, perhaps, the human race would develop a new aesthetic; 
generations of artists might arise whose ideals were not based upon the natural 
forms of earth moulded by wind and water. space itself was a realm of often 
overpowering beauty; unfortunately, man's hardware did not yet live up to it.

    apart from the four huge propellant tanks, which would be dropped off as 
soon as the transfer orbit was achieved, leonov was surprisingly small. from 
heat shield to drive units was less than fifty metres; it was hard to believe 
that so modest a vehicle, smaller than many commercial aircraft, could carry ten 
men and women halfway across the solar system.

    but zero gravity, which made walls and roof and floor interchangeable, 
rewrote all the rules of living. there was plenty of room aboard leonov even 
when everyone was awake at the same time, as was certainly the case at the 
moment. indeed, her normal complement was at least doubled by assorted newsmen, 
engineers making final adjustments, and anxious officials.

    as soon as the shuttle had docked, floyd tried to find the cabin he would 
share - a year hence, when he awoke - with curnow and chandra. when he did 
locate it, he discovered that it was packed so tightly with neatly labelled 
boxes of equipment and provisions that entry was almost impossible. he was 
wondering glumly how to get a foot in the door when one of the crew, launching 
himself skilfully from handhold to handhold, noticed floyd's dilemma and braked 
to a halt.

    'dr floyd - welcome aboard. i'm max brailovsky - assistant engineer.'

    the young russian spoke the slow, careful english of a student who had had 
more lessons with an electronic tutor than a human teacher. as they shook hands, 
floyd matched the face and name to the set of crew biographies he had already 
studied: maxim andreievitch brailovsky, age thirty-one, born leningrad, 
specializing in structure; hobbies: fencing, skycycling, chess.

    'glad to meet you,' said floyd. 'but how do i get inside?'

    'not to worry,' said max cheerfully. 'all that will be gone when you wake 
up. it's - what do you say? - expendables. we'll eat your room empty by the time 
you need it. i promise.' he patted his stomach.

    'fine - but meanwhile where do i put my things?' floyd pointed to the three 
small cases, total mass fifty kilograms, which contained - he hoped - everything 
he needed for the next couple of billion kilometres. it had been no easy task, 
shepherding their weightless, but not inertialess, bulk through the ship's 
corridors with only a few collisions.

    max took two of the bags, glided gently through the triangle formed by three 
intersecting girders, and dived into a small hatchway, apparently defying 
newton's first law in the process. floyd acquired a few extra bruises while 
following him; after a considerable time - leonov seemed much bigger inside than 
out- they arrived at a door labelled captain, in both cyrillic and roman. 
although he could read russian much better than he could speak it, floyd 
appreciated the gesture; he had already noticed that all ship's notices were 
bilingual.

    at max's knock, a green light flashed on, and floyd drifted inside as 
gracefully as he could. though he had spoken to captain orlova many times, they 
had never before met. so he had two surprises.

    it was impossible to judge a person's real size over the viewphone; the 
camera somehow converted everyone to the same scale. captain orlova, standing - 
as well as one could stand in zero gravity - barely reached to floyd's 
shoulders. the viewphone had also completely failed to convey the penetrating 
quality of those dazzling blue eyes, much the most striking feature of a face 
that, at the moment, could not be fairly judged for beauty.

    'hello, tanya,' said floyd. 'how nice to meet at last. but what a pity about 
your hair.'

    they grasped both hands, like old friends.

    'and nice to have you aboard, heywood!' answered the captain. her english, 
unlike brailovsky's, was quite fluent, though heavily accented. 'yes, i was 
sorry to lose it - but hair's a nuisance on long missions, and i like to keep 
the local barbers away as long as possible. and my apologies about your cabin; 
as max will have explained, we suddenly found we needed another ten cubic metres 
of storage space. vasili and i won't be spending much time here for the next few 
hours - please feel free to use our quarters.'

    'thank you. what about curnow and chandra?'

    'i've made similar arrangements with the crew. it may seem as if we're 
treating you like cargo -'

    'not wanted on voyage.'

    'pardon?'

    'that's a label they used to put on the baggage, in the old days of ocean 
travel.'

    tanya smiled. 'it does look rather that way. but you'll be wanted all right, 
at the end of the trip. we're already planning your revival party.'

    'that sounds too religious. make it - no, resurrection would be even worse! 
- waking-up party. but i can see how busy you are - let me dump my things and 
continue my grand tour.'

    'max will show you around - take dr floyd to vasili, will you? he's down in 
the drive unit.'

    as they drifted out of the captain's quarters, floyd gave mental good marks 
to the crew-selection committee. tanya orlova was impressive enough on paper; in 
the flesh she was almost intimidating, despite her charm. i wonder what she's 
like, floyd asked himself, when she loses her temper. would it be fire or ice? 
on the whole, i'd prefer not to find out.

    floyd was rapidly acquiring his space legs; by the time they reached vasili 
orlov, he was manoeuvring almost as confidently as his guide. the chief 
scientist greeted floyd as warmly as his wife had.

    'welcome aboard, heywood. how do you feel?'

    'fine, apart from slowly starving to death.'

    for a moment orlov looked puzzled; then his face split into a broad smile,

    'oh, i'd forgotten. well, it won't be for long. in ten months' time, you can 
eat as much as you like.'

    hibernators went on a low-residue diet a week in advance; for the last 
twenty-four hours, they took nothing but liquid. floyd was beginning to wonder 
how much of his increasing light-headedness was due to starvation, how much to 
curnow's champagne, and how much to zero gravity.

    to concentrate his mind, he scanned the multicoloured mass of plumbing that 
surrounded them.

    'so this is the famous sakharov drive. it's the first time i've seen a full-
scale unit.'

    'it's only the fourth one ever built.'

    'i hope it works.'

    'it had better. otherwise, the gorky city council will be renaming sakharov 
square again.'

    it was a sign of the times that a russian could joke, however wryly, about 
his country's treatment of its greatest scientist. floyd was again reminded of 
sakharov's eloquent speech to the academy, when he was belatedly made hero of 
the soviet union. prison and banishment, he had told his listeners, were 
splendid aids to creativity; not a few masterpieces had been born within the 
walls of cells, beyond the reach of the world's distractions. for that matter, 
the greatest single achievement of the human intellect, the principia itself, 
was a product of newton's self-imposed exile from plague-ridden london.

    the comparison was not immodest; from those years in gorky had come not only 
new insights into the structure of matter and the origin of the universe, but 
the plasma-controlling concepts that had led to practical thermonuclear power. 
the drive itself, though the best-known and most publicized outcome of that 
work, was merely one byproduct of that astonishing intellectual outburst. the 
tragedy was that such advances had been triggered by injustice; one day, 
perhaps, humanity would find more civilized ways of managing its affairs.

    by the time they had left the chamber, floyd had learned more about the 
sakharov drive than he really wished to know, or expected to remember. he was 
well acquainted with its basic principles - the use of a pulsed thermonuclear 
reaction to heat and expel virtually any propellant material. the best results 
were obtained with pure hydrogen as a working fluid, but that was excessively 
bulky and difficult to store over long periods of time. methane and ammonia were 
acceptable alternatives; even water could be used, though with considerably 
poorer efficiency.

    leonov would compromise; the enormous liquid hydrogen tanks that provided 
the initial impetus would be discarded when the ship had attained the necessary 
speed to carry it to jupiter. at the destination, ammonia would be used for the 
braking and rendezvous manoeuvres, and the eventual return to earth.

    that was the theory, checked and rechecked in endless tests and computer 
simulations. but as the ill-fated discovery had shown so well, all human plans 
were subject to ruthless revision by nature, or fate, or whatever one preferred 
to call the powers behind the universe.

    'so there you are, dr floyd,' said an authoritative female voice, 
interrupting vasili's enthusiastic explanation of magnetohydrodynamic feedback, 
'why didn't you report to me?'

    floyd rotated slowly on his axis by gently torquing himself with one hand. 
he saw a massive, maternal figure wearing a curious uniform adorned with dozens 
of pockets and pouches; the effect was not unlike that of a cossack trooper 
draped with cartridge belts.

    'nice to meet you again, doctor. i'm still exploring - i hope you've 
received my medical report from houston.'

    'those vets at teague! i wouldn't trust them to recognize foot-and-mouth 
disease!'

    floyd knew perfectly well the mutual respect felt between katerina rudenko 
and the olin teague medical center, even if the doctor's broad grin had not 
discounted her words. she saw his look of frank curiosity, and proudly fingered 
the webbing around her ample waist.

    'the conventional little black bag isn't very practical in zero gravity - 
things float out of it and aren't there when you need them. i designed this 
myself, it's a complete minisurgery. with this, i could remove an appendix - or 
deliver a baby.'

    'i trust that particular problem won't arise here.'

    'ha! a good doctor has to be ready for everything.'

    what a contrast, thought floyd, between captain orlova and dr - or should he 
call her by her correct rank of surgeon-commander? - rudenko. the captain had 
the grace and intensity of a prima ballerina; the doctor might have been the 
prototype of mother russia - stocky build, flat peasant face, needing only a 
shawl to complete the picture. don't let that fool you, floyd told himself. this 
is the woman who saved at least a dozen lives during the komarov docking 
accident - and, in her spare time, manages to edit the annals of space medicine. 
consider yourself very lucky to have her aboard.

    'now, dr floyd, you're going to have plenty of time later to explore our 
little ship. my colleagues are too polite to say this, but they've work to do 
and you're in the way. i'd like to get you - all three of you - nice and 
peaceful as quickly as we can. then we'll have less to worry about.'

    'i was afraid of that, but i quite see your point of view. i'm ready as soon 
as you are.'

    'i'm always ready. come along - please.'



    the ship's hospital was just large enough to hold an operating table, two 
exercise bicycles, a few cabinets of equipment, and an x-ray machine. while dr 
rudenko was giving floyd a quick but thorough examination, she asked 
unexpectedly: 'what's that little gold cylinder dr chandra carries on the chain 
around his neck - some kind of communications device? he wouldn't take it off - 
in fact, he was almost too shy to take anything off.'

    floyd could not help smiling; it was easy to imagine the modest indian's 
reactions to this rather overwhelming lady.

    'it's a lingam.'

    'a what?'

    'you're the doctor - you ought to recognize it. the symbol of male 
fertility.'

    'of course - stupid of me. is he a practising hindu? it's a little late to 
ask us to arrange a strict vegetarian diet.'

    'don't worry - we wouldn't have done that to you without fair warning. 
though he won't touch alcohol, chandra's not fanatical about anything except 
computers. he once told me that his grandfather was a priest in benares, and 
gave him that lingam - it's been in the family for generations.'

    rather to floyd's surprise, dr rudenko did not show the negative reaction he 
had expected; indeed, her expression became uncharacteristically wistful.

    'i understand his feeling. my grandmother gave me a beautiful icon - 
sixteenth century. i wanted to bring it - but it weighs five kilos.'

    the doctor became abruptly businesslike again, gave floyd a painless 
injection with a gas-gun hypodermic, and told him to come back as soon as he was 
sleepy. that, she assured him, would be in less than two hours.

    'meanwhile, relax completely,' she ordered. 'there's an observation port on 
this level - station d.6. why don't you go there?'

    it seemed a good idea, and floyd drifted away with a docility that would 
have surprised his friends. dr rudenko glanced at her watch, dictated a brief 
entry into her autosec, and set its alarm thirty minutes ahead.

    when he reached the d.6 viewport, floyd found chandra and curnow already 
there. they looked at him with a total lack of recognition, then turned once 
more toward the awesome spectacle outside. it occurred to floyd - and he 
congratulated himself on such a brilliant observation - that chandra could not 
really be enjoying the view. his eyes were tightly closed,

    a totally unfamiliar planet hung there, gleaming with glorious blues and 
dazzling whites. how strange, floyd told himself. what has happened to the 
earth? why, of course - no wonder he didn't recognize it! it was upside down! 
what a disaster - he wept briefly for all those poor people, falling off into 
space..

    he barely noticed when two crew members removed chandra's unresisting form. 
when they came back for curnow, floyd's own eyes were shut, but he was still 
breathing. when they returned for him, even his breathing had ceased.



    ii

    tsien



    6

    awakening



    and they told us we wouldn't dream, thought heywood floyd, more with 
surprise than annoyance. the glorious pink glow that surrounded him was very 
soothing; it reminded him of barbecues and the crackling logs of christmas fire. 
but there was no warmth; indeed, he felt a distinct though not uncomfortable 
coldness.

    voices were murmuring, just too softly for him to understand the words. they 
became louder - but still he could not understand.

    'surely,' he said in sudden amazement, 'i can't be dreaming in russian!'

    'no, heywood,' answered a woman's voice. 'you're not dreaming. it's time to 
get out of bed.'

    the lovely glow faded; he opened his eyes, and had a blurred glimpse of a 
flashlight being withdrawn from his face. he was lying on a couch, held against 
it by elastic webbing; figures were standing around him, but they were too out 
of focus to identify.

    gentle fingers closed his eyelids and massaged his forehead. 

    'don't exert yourself. breathe deeply... again... that's right... now how do 
you feel?'

    'i don't know... strange... light-headed... and hungry.'

    'that's a good sign. do you know where you are? you can open your eyes now.'

    the figures came into focus - first dr rudenko, then captain orlova. but 
something had happened to tanya since he had seen her, only an hour ago. when 
floyd identified the cause, it was almost a physical shock.

    'you've grown your hair back!'

    'i hope you think it's an improvement. i can't say the same about your 
beard.'

    floyd lifted his hand to his face, finding that he had to make a conscious 
effort to plan every stage of the movement. his chin was covered with short 
stubble - a two or three days' growth. in hibernation, hair grew at only a 
hundredth of its normal rate.

    'so i made it,' he said. 'we've arrived at jupiter.'

    tanya looked at him sombrely, then glanced at the doctor, who gave a barely 
perceptible nod.

    'no, heywood,' she said. 'we're still a month away. don't be alarmed - the 
ship's fine, and everything's running normally. but your friends in washington 
have asked us to wake you up ahead of time. something very unexpected has 
happened. we're in a race to reach discovery - and i'm afraid we're going to 
lose.'



    7

    tsien



    when heywood floyd's voice came from the comset speaker, the two dolphins 
suddenly stopped circling around the pool and swam over to its edge. they placed 
their heads on the rim and stared intently at the source of the sound.

    so they recognize heywood, thought caroline, with a twinge of bitterness: 
yet christopher, crawling around his playpen, did not even stop playing with the 
colour controls of his picture book as his father's voice came loud and clear 
across half a billion kilometres of space.

    '... my dear, you won't be surprised to hear from me, a month ahead of 
schedule; you'll have known for weeks that we have company out here.

    'i still find it hard to believe; in some ways, it doesn't even make sense. 
they can't possibly have enough fuel for a safe return to earth; we don't even 
see how they can make the rendezvous.

    'we never saw them, of course. even at its closest, tsien was more than 
fifty million kilometres away. they had plenty of time to answer our signals if 
they wanted to, but they ignored us completely. now they'll be much too busy for 
friendly chat. in a few hours they'll hit jupiter's atmosphere - and then we'll 
see how well their aerobraking system works. if it does its job, that will be 
good for our morale. but if it fails, well, let's not talk about that.

    'the russians are taking it remarkably well, all things considered. they're 
angry and disappointed, of course - but i've heard many expressions of frank 
admiration. it was certainly a brilliant trick, building that ship in full view 
and making everyone think it was a spacestation until they hitched on those 
boosters.

    'well, there's nothing we can do, except watch. and at our distance, we 
won't have a much better view than your best telescopes. i can't help wishing 
them luck, though of course i hope they leave discovery alone. that's our 
property, and i bet the state department's reminding them of it, every hour on 
the hour.

    'it's an ill wind - if our chinese friends hadn't jumped the gun on us, you 
wouldn't have heard from me for another month. but now that dr rudenko's woken 
me up, i'll be speaking to you every couple of days.

    'after the initial shock, i'm settling down nicely- getting to know the ship 
and its crew, finding my space legs. and polishing up my lousy russian, though i 
don't have much chance of using it - everyone insists on speaking english.

    what shocking linguists we americans are! i sometimes feel ashamed of our 
chauvinism - or our laziness.

    'the standard of on-board english ranges from absolutely perfect - chief 
engineer sasha kovalev could earn a living as a bbc announcer - down to the if-
you-talk-fast-enough-it-doesn't-matter-how-many-mistakes-you-make variety. the 
only one who isn't fluent is zenia marchenko, who replaced irma yakunina at the 
last moment. incidentally, i'm glad to hear that irma made a good recovery - 
what a disappointment that must have been! i wonder if she's started hang-
gliding again.

    'and speaking of accidents, it's obvious that zenia must also have had a 
very bad one. though the plastic surgeons have done a remarkable job, you can 
tell that she must have been severely burned at some time. she's the baby of the 
crew and the others treat her with - i was going to say pity, but that's too 
condescending. let's say with special kindness.

    'maybe you're wondering how i get on with captain tanya. well, i like her 
very much - but i'd hate to make her angry. there's no doubt exactly who runs 
this ship.

    'and surgeon-commander rudenko - you met her at the honolulu aerospace 
convention two years ago, and i'm sure you won't have forgotten that last party. 
you'll understand why we all call her catherine the great - behind her broad 
back, of course.

    'but that's enough gossip. if i run overtime, i hate to think of the 
surcharge. and by the way, these personal calls are supposed to be completely 
private. but there are a lot of links in the communications chain, so don't be 
surprised if you occasionally get messages by - well, another route.

    'i'll be waiting to hear from you - tell the girls i'll be speaking to them 
later. my love to you all - i miss you and chris very badly. and when i get 
back, i promise i'll never leave again.'



    there was a brief hissing pause, then an obviously synthetic voice said: 
'this terminates transmission four hundred thirty-two stroke seven from 
spacecraft leonov.' as caroline floyd switched off the speaker, the two dolphins 
slid beneath the surface of the pool and glided out into the pacific, leaving 
scarcely a ripple in the water.

     when he realized that his friends were gone, christopher began to cry. his 
mother picked him up in her arms and tried to comfort him, but it was a long 
time before she succeeded.



    8

    transit of jupiter



    the image of jupiter, with its ribbons of white cloud, its mottled bands of 
salmon pink, and the great red spot staring out like a baleful eye, hung steady 
on the flight-deck projection screen. it was three-quarters full, but no one was 
looking at the illuminated disk; all eyes were focused on the crescent of 
darkness at its edge. there, over the nightside of the planet, the chinese ship 
was about to meet its moment of truth.

    this is absurd, thought floyd. we can't possibly see anything across forty 
million kilometres. and it doesn't matter; the radio will tell us all we want to 
know.

    tsien had closed down all voice, video, and data circuits two hours before, 
as the long-range antennas were withdrawn into the protective shadow of the heat 
shield. only the omnidirectional beacon was still transmitting, accurately 
pinpointing the chinese ship's position as it plunged toward that ocean of 
continent-sized clouds. the shrill beep... beep... beep... was the only sound in 
leonov's control room. each of those pulses had left jupiter more than two 
minutes earlier; by this time, their source might already be a cloud of 
incandescent gas, dispersing in the jovian stratosphere.

    the signal was fading, becoming noisy. the beeps were getting distorted; 
several dropped out completely, then the sequence returned. a plasma sheath was 
building up around tsien and soon would cut off all communications until the 
ship re-emerged. if it ever did.

    'posmotri!' cried max. 'there it is!'

    at first floyd could see nothing. then, just off the edge of the illuminated 
disk, he made out a tiny star - gleaming where no star could possibly be, 
against the darkened face of jupiter. 

    it appeared quite motionless, though he knew it must be moving at a hundred 
kilometres a second. slowly it grew in brilliance; and then it was no longer a 
dimensionless point, but was becoming elongated. a man-made comet was streaking 
across the jovian night sky, leaving a trail of incandescence thousands of 
kilometres in length.

    one last badly distorted and curiously drawn-out beep sounded from the 
tracking beacon, then only the meaningless hiss of jupiter's own radiation, one 
of those many cosmic voices that had nothing to do with man or his works.

    tsien was inaudible, but not yet invisible. for they could see that the tiny 
elongated spark had indeed moved appreciably away from the sunward face of the 
planet and would soon disappear into the nightside. by then, if all had gone 
according to plan, jupiter would have captured the ship, destroying its unwanted 
velocity. when it emerged from behind the giant world, it would be another 
jovian satellite.

    the spark flickered out. tsien had rounded the curve of the planet and was 
heading over the nightside. there would be nothing to see, or to hear, until it 
emerged from shadow - if all went well, in just under an hour. it would be a 
very long hour for the chinese.

    to chief scientist vasili orlov and communications engineer sasha kovalev, 
the hour went extremely quickly. there was much they could learn from 
observations of that little star; its times of appearance and disappearance and, 
above all, the doppler shift of the radio beacon gave vital information about 
tsien's new orbit. leonov's computers were already digesting the figures, and 
spitting out projected times of re-emergence based on various assumptions about 
rates of deceleration in the jovian atmosphere.

    vasili switched off the computer display, spun around in his chair, loosened 
his seat belt, and addressed the patiently waiting audience.

    'earliest reappearance is in forty-two minutes. why don't you spectators go 
for a walk, so we can concentrate on getting all this into good shape? see you 
in thirty-five minutes. shoo! nu ukhodi!'

    reluctantly, the unwanted bodies left the bridge - but, to vasili's disgust, 
everyone was back again in little more than thirty minutes. he was still chiding 
them for their lack of faith in his calculations when the familiar beep... 
beep... beep... of tsien's tracking beacon burst from the loudspeakers.

    vasili looked astonished and mortified, but soon joined in the spontaneous 
round of applause; floyd could not see who first started the clapping. rivals 
though they might be, they were all astronauts together, as far from home as any 
men had ever travelled - 'ambassadors for mankind', in the noble words of the 
first un space treaty. even if they did not want the chinese to succeed, neither 
did they wish them to meet disaster.

    a large element of self-interest was also involved, floyd could not help 
thinking. now the odds in leonov's own favour were significantly improved; tsien 
had demonstrated that the aerobraking manoeuvre was indeed possible. the data on 
jupiter was correct; its atmosphere did not contain unexpected and perhaps fatal 
surprises.

    'well!' said tanya. 'i suppose we should send them a message of 
congratulations. but even if we did, they wouldn't acknowledge it.'

    some of his colleagues were still making fun of vasili, who was staring at 
his computer output in frank disbelief.

    'i don't understand it!' he exclaimed. 'they should still be behind jupiter! 
sasha - give me a velocity reading on their beacon!'

    another silent dialogue was held with the computer; then vasili gave a long, 
low whistle.

    'something's wrong. they're in a capture orbit, all right - but it won't let 
them make a rendezvous with discovery. the orbit they're on now will take them 
way beyond io - i'll have more accurate data when we've tracked them for another 
five minutes.'

    'anyway, they must be in a safe orbit,' said tanya. 'they can always make 
corrections later.'

    'perhaps. but that could cost them days, even if they have the fuel. which i 
doubt.'

    'so we may still beat them.'

    'don't be such an optimist. we're still three weeks from jupiter. they can 
make a dozen orbits before we get there, and choose the most favourable one for 
a rendezvous.'

    'again - assuming that they have enough propellant.'

    'of course. and that's something we can only make educated guesses about.'

    all this conversation took place in such rapid and excited russian that 
floyd was left far behind. when tanya took pity on him and explained that tsien 
had overshot and was heading for the outer satellites, his first reaction was: 
'then they may be in serious trouble. what will you do if they appeal for help?'

    'you must be making a joke. can you imagine them doing that? they're much 
too proud. anyway, it would be impossible. we can't change our mission profile, 
as you know perfectly well. even if we had the fuel...'

    'you're right, of course; but it might be difficult to explain that to the 
ninety-nine per cent of the human race that doesn't understand orbital 
mechanics. we should start thinking about some of the political complications - 
it would look bad for all of us if we can't help. vasili, will you give me their 
final orbit, as soon as you've worked it out? i'm going down to my cabin to do 
some homework.'

    floyd's cabin, or rather one-third of a cabin, was still partly full of 
stores, many of them stacked in the curtained bunks that would be occupied by 
chandra and curnow when they emerged from their long slumbers. he had managed to 
clear a small working space for his personal effects and had been promised the 
luxury of another whole two cubic metres - just as soon as someone could be 
spared to help with the furniture removing.

    floyd unlocked his little communications console, set the decryption keys, 
and called for the information on tsien that had been transmitted to him from 
washington. he wondered if his hosts had had any luck in unscrambling it; the 
cipher was based on the product of two hundred-digit prime numbers, and the 
national security agency had staked its reputation on the claim that the fastest 
computer in existence could not crack it before the big crunch at the end of the 
universe. it was a claim that could never be proved - only disproved.

    once again he stared intently at the excellent photographs of the chinese 
ship, taken when it had revealed its true colours and was just about to leave 
earth orbit. there were later shots - not so clear, because by then it had been 
far away from the prying cameras - of the final stage as it hurtled toward 
jupiter. those were the ones that interested him most; even more useful were the 
cutaway drawings and estimates of performance.

    granted the most optimistic assumptions, it was difficult to see what the 
chinese hoped to do. they must have burned up at least ninety per cent of their 
propellant in that mad dash across the solar system. unless it was literally a 
suicide mission - something that could not be ruled out - only a plan involving 
hibernation and later rescue made any sense. and intelligence did not believe 
that chinese hibernation technology was sufficiently far advanced to make that a 
viable option.

    but intelligence was frequently wrong, and even more often confused by the 
avalanche of raw facts it had to evaluate - the 'noise' in its information 
circuits. it had done a remarkable job on tsien, considering the shortness of 
time, but floyd wished that the material sent to him had been more carefully 
filtered. some of it was obvious junk, of no possible connection with the 
mission.

    nevertheless, when you did not know what you were looking for, it was 
important to avoid all prejudices and preconceptions; something that at first 
sight seemed irrelevant, or even nonsensical, might turn out to be a vital clue.

    with a sigh, floyd started once more to skim the five hundred pages of data, 
keeping his mind as blankly receptive as possible while diagrams, charts, 
photographs - some so smudgy that they could represent almost anything - news 
items, lists of delegates to scientific conferences, titles of technical 
publications, and even commercial documents scrolled swiftly down the high-
resolution screen. a very efficient industrial espionage system had obviously 
been extremely busy; who would have thought that so many japanese holomemory 
modules or swiss gas-flow microcontrollers or german radiation detectors could 
have been traced to a destination in the dried lake bed of lop nor - the first 
milepost on their way to jupiter?

    some of the items must have been included by accident; they could not 
possibly relate to the mission. if the chinese had placed a secret order for one 
thousand infrared sensors through a dummy corporation in singapore, that was 
only the concern of the military; it seemed highly unlikely that tsien expected 
to be chased by heat-seeking missiles. and this one was really funny - 
specialized surveying and prospecting equipment from glacier geophysics, inc., 
of anchorage, alaska. what lamebrain imagined that a deep-space expedition would 
have any need - the smile froze on floyd's lips; he felt the skin crawl on the 
back of his neck. my god - they wouldn't dare! but they had already dared 
greatly; and now, at last, everything made sense.

    he flashed back to the photos and conjectured plans of the chinese ship. 
yes, it was just conceivable - those flutings at the rear, alongside the drive 
deflection electrodes, would be about the right size.

    floyd called the bridge. 'vasili.' he said, 'have you worked out their orbit 
yet?'

    'yes, i have,' the navigator replied, in a curiously subdued voice. floyd 
could tell at once that something had turned up. he took a long shot.

    'they're making a rendezvous with europa, aren't they?'

    there was an explosive gasp of disbelief from the other end.

    'chyort voz'mi! how did you know?'

    'i didn't - i've just guessed it.'

    'there can't be any mistake - i've checked the figures to six places. the 
braking manoeuvre worked out exactly as they intended. they're right on course 
for europa - it couldn't have happened by chance. they'll be there in seventeen 
hours.' 

    'and go into orbit.'

    'perhaps; it wouldn't take much propellant. but what would be the point?'

    'i'll risk another guess. they'll do a quick survey - and then they'll 
land.'

    'you're crazy - or do you know something we don't?'

    'no - it's just a matter of simple deduction. you're going to start kicking 
yourself for missing the obvious.'

    'okay, sherlock, why should anyone want to land on europa? what's there, for 
heaven's sake?'

    floyd was enjoying his little moment of triumph. of course, he might still 
be completely wrong.

    'what's on europa? only the most valuable substance in the universe.'

    he had overdone it; vasili was no fool, and snatched the answer from his 
lips.

    'of course - water!'

    'exactly. billions and billions of tons of it. enough to fill up the 
propellant tanks - go cruising around all the satellites, and still have plenty 
left for the rendezvous with discovery and the voyage home. i hate to say this, 
vasili - but our chinese friends have outsmarted us again.

    'always assuming, of course, that they can get away with it.'



    9

    the ice of the grand canal



    apart from the jet-black sky, the photo might have been taken almost 
anywhere in the polar regions of earth; there was nothing in the least alien 
about the sea of wrinkled ice that stretched all the way out to the horizon. 
only the five spacesuited figures in the foreground proclaimed that the panorama 
was of another world.

    even now, the secretive chinese had not released the names of the crew. the 
anonymous intruders on the frozen europan icescape were merely the chief 
scientist, the commander, the navigator, the first engineer, the second 
engineer. it was also ironic, floyd could not help thinking, that everyone on 
earth had seen the already historic photograph an hour before it reached leonov, 
so much closer to the scene. but tsien's transmissions were relayed on such a 
tight beam that it was impossible to intercept them; leonov could receive only 
its beacon, broadcasting impartially in all directions. even that was inaudible 
more than half the time, as europa's rotation carried it out of sight, or the 
satellite itself was eclipsed by the monstrous bulk of jupiter. all the scanty 
news of the chinese mission had to be relayed from earth. 

    the ship had touched down, after its initial survey, on one of the few 
islands of solid rock that protruded through the crust of ice covering virtually 
the entire moon. that ice was flat from pole to pole; there was no weather to 
carve it into strange shapes, no drifting snow to build up layer upon layer into 
slowly moving hills. meteorites might fall upon airless europa, but never a 
flake of snow. the only forces moulding its surface were the steady tug of 
gravity, reducing all elevations to one uniform level, and the incessant quakes 
caused by the other satellites as they passed and repassed europa in their 
orbits. jupiter itself, despite its far greater mass, had much less effect. the 
jovian tides had finished their work aeons ago, ensuring that europa remained 
locked forever with one face turned toward its giant master.

    all this had been known since the voyager flyby missions of the 1970s, the 
galileo surveys of the 1980s, and the kepler landings of the 1990s. but, in a 
few hours, the chinese had learned more about europa than all the previous 
missions combined. that knowledge they were keeping to themselves; one might 
regret it, but few would deny that they had earned the right to do so.

    what was being denied, with greater and greater asperity, was their right to 
annex the satellite. for the first time in history, a nation had laid claim to 
another world, and all the news media of earth were arguing over the legal 
position. though the chinese pointed out, at tedious length, that they had never 
signed the '02 un space treaty and so were not bound by its provisions, that did 
nothing to quell the angry protests.

    suddenly, europa was the biggest news in the solar system. and the man-on-
the-spot (at least to the nearest few million kilometres) was in great demand.



    'this is heywood floyd, aboard cosmonaut alexei leonov, on course for 
jupiter. but as you can well imagine, all our thoughts are now focused upon 
europa.

    'at this very moment i'm looking at it through the most powerful of the 
ship's telescopes; under this magnification, it's ten times larger than the moon 
as you see it with the naked eye. and it's a really weird sight.

    'the surface is a uniform pink, with a few small brown patches. it's covered 
with an intricate network of narrow lines, curling and weaving in all 
directions. in fact, it looks very much like a photo from a medical textbook, 
showing a pattern of veins and arteries.

    'a few of these features are hundreds - or even thousands - of kilometres 
long, and look rather like the illusory canals that percival lowell and other 
early-twentieth-century astronomers imagined they'd seen on mars.

    'but europa's canals aren't an illusion, though of course they're not 
artificial. what's more, they do contain water -or at least ice. for the 
satellite is almost entirely covered by ocean, averaging fifty kilometres deep.

    'because it's so far from the sun, europa's surface temperature is extremely 
low - about a hundred and fifty degrees below freezing. so one might expect its 
single ocean to be a solid block of ice.

    'surprisingly, that isn't the case because there's a lot of heat generated 
inside europa by tidal forces - the same forces that drive the great volcanoes 
on neighbouring io.

    'so the ice is continually melting, breaking up, and freezing, forming 
cracks and lanes like those in the floating ice sheets in our own polar regions. 
it's that intricate tracery of cracks i'm seeing now; most of them are dark and 
very ancient - perhaps millions of years old. but a few are almost pure white; 
they're the new ones that have just opened up, and have a crust only a few 
centimetres thick.

    'tsien has landed right beside one of these white streaks -the fifteen-
hundred-kilometre-long feature that's been christened the grand canal. 
presumably the chinese intend to pump its water into their propellant tanks, so 
that they can explore the jovian satellite system and then return to earth. that 
may not be easy, but they'll certainly have studied the landing site with great 
care, and must know what they're doing.

    'it's obvious, now, why they've taken such a risk - and why they should 
claim europa. as a refuelling point, it could be the key to the entire outer 
solar system. though there's also water on ganymede, it's all frozen, and also 
less accessible because of that satellite's more powerful gravity.

    'and there's another point that's just occurred to me. even if the chinese 
do get stranded on europa, they might be able to survive until a rescue mission 
is arranged. they have plenty of power, there may be useful minerals in the area 
- and we know that the chinese are the experts on synthetic-food production. it 
wouldn't be a very luxurious life; but i have some friends who would accept it 
happily for that staggering view of jupiter sprawled across the sky - the view 
we expect to see ourselves, in just a few days.

    'this is heywood floyd, saying goodbye for my colleagues and myself, aboard 
alexei leonov.'

    'and this is the bridge. very nice presentation, heywood. you should have 
been a newsman.'

    'i've had plenty of practice. half my time was spent on pr work.'

    'pr?'

    'public relations - usually telling politicians why they should give me more 
money. something you don't have to bother about.'

    'how i wish that was true. anyway, come up to the bridge. there's some new 
information we'd like to discuss with you.'

    floyd removed his button microphone, locked the telescope into position and 
extricated himself from the tiny viewing blister. as he left, he almost collided 
with nikolai temovsky, obviously on a similar mission.

    'i'm about to steal your best quotes for radio moscow, woody. hope you don't 
mind.'

    'you're welcome, tovarishch. anyway, how could i stop you?'

    up on the bridge, captain orlova was looking thoughtfully at a dense mass of 
words and figures on the main display. floyd had painfully started to 
transliterate them when she interrupted him.

    'don't worry about the details. these are estimates of the time it will take 
for tsien to refill its tanks and get ready for lift-off.' 

    'my people are doing the same calculations - but there are far too many 
variables.'

    'we think we've removed one of them. did you know that the very best water 
pumps you can buy belong to fire brigades? and would you be surprised to learn 
that the beijing central station had four of its latest models suddenly 
requisitioned a few months ago, despite the protests of the mayor?'

    'i'm not surprised - merely lost in admiration. go on, please.'

    'that may be a coincidence, but those pumps would be just the right size. 
making educated guesses about pipe deployment, drilling through the ice and so 
on - well, we think they could lift off again in five days.'

    'five days!'

    'if they're lucky, and everything works perfectly. and if they don't wait to 
fill their propellant tanks but merely take on just enough for a safe rendezvous 
with discovery before we do. even if they beat us by a single hour, that would 
be enough. they could claim salvage rights, at the very least.'

    'not according to the state department's lawyers. at the appropriate moment, 
we'll declare that discovery is not a derelict, but has merely been parked until 
we can retrieve it. any attempt to take over the ship would be an act of 
piracy.'

    'i'm sure the chinese will be most impressed.'

    'if they're not, what can we do about it?'

    'we outnumber them - and two to one, when we revive chandra and curnow.'

    'are you serious? where are the cutlasses for the boarding party?'

    'cutlasses?'

    'swords - weapons.'

    'oh. we could use the laser telespectrometer. that can vaporize milligram 
asteroid samples at ranges of a thousand kilometres.'

    'i'm not sure that i like this conversation. my government certainly would 
not condone violence, except of course in self-defence.'

    'you naive americans! we're more realistic; we have to be. all your 
grandparents died of old age, heywood. three of mine were killed in the great 
patriotic war.'

    when they were alone together, tanya always called him woody, never heywood. 
she must be serious. or was she merely testing his reactions?

    'anyway, discovery is merely a few billion dollars' worth of hardware. the 
ship's not important - only the information it carries.'

    'exactly. information that could be copied, and then erased.'

    'you do get some cheerful ideas, tanya. sometimes i think that all russians 
are a little paranoiac.'

    'thanks to napoleon and hitler, we've earned every right to be. but don't 
tell me that you haven't already worked out that - what do you call it, 
scenario? - for yourself.'

    'it wasn't necessary,' floyd answered rather glumly. 'the state department's 
already done it for me - with variations. we'll just have to see which one the 
chinese come up with. and i wouldn't be in the least surprised if they outguess 
us again.'



    10

    a cry from europa



    sleeping in zero gravity is a skill that has to be learned; it had taken 
floyd almost a week to find the best way of anchoring legs and arms so that they 
did not drift into uncomfortable positions. now he was an expert, and was not 
looking forward to the return of weight; indeed, the very idea gave him 
occasional nightmares. 

    someone was shaking him awake. no - he must still be dreaming! privacy was 
sacred aboard a spaceship; nobody ever entered another crew member's chambers 
without first asking permission. he clenched his eyes shut, but the shaking 
continued.

    'dr floyd - please wake up! you're wanted on the flight deck!'

    and nobody called him dr floyd; the most formal salutation he had received 
for weeks was doc. what was happening?

    reluctantly, he opened his eyes. he was in his tiny cabin, gently gripped by 
his sleeping cocoon. so one part of his mind told him; then why was he looking 
at - europa? they were still millions of kilometres away.

    there were the familiar reticulations, the patterns of triangles and 
polygons formed by intersecting lines. and surely that was the grand canal 
itself - no, it wasn't quite right. how could it be, since he was still in his 
little cabin aboard leonov?

    'dr floyd!' 

    he became fully awake, and realized that his left hand was floating just a 
few centimetres in front of his eyes. how strange that the pattern of lines 
across the palm was so uncannily like the map of europa! but economical mother 
nature was always repeating herself, on such vastly different scales as the 
swirl of milk stirred into coffee, the cloud lanes of a cyclonic storm, the arms 
of a spiral nebula.

    'sorry, max,' he said. 'what's the problem? is something wrong?'

    'we think so - but not with us. tsien's in trouble.'

    captain, navigator, and chief engineer were strapped in their seats on the 
flight deck; the rest of the crew orbited anxiously around convenient handholds, 
or watched on the monitors.

    'sorry to wake you up, heywood,' tanya apologized brusquely. 'here's the 
situation. ten minutes ago we had a class one priority from mission control. 
tsien's gone off the air. it happened very suddenly, in the middle of a cipher 
message; there were a few seconds of garbled transmission - then nothing.'

    'their beacon?'

    'that's stopped as well. we can't receive it either,'

    'phew! then it must be serious - a major breakdown. any theories?'

    'lots - but all guesswork. an explosion - landslide - earthquake: who 
knows?'

    'and we may never know - until someone else lands on europa - or we do a 
close flyby and take a look.'

    tanya shook her head. 'we don't have enough delta-vee. the closest we could 
get is fifty thousand kilometres. not much you could see from that distance.'

    'then there's absolutely nothing we can do.'

    'not quite, heywood. mission control has a suggestion. they'd like us to 
swing our big dish around, just in case we can pick up any weak emergency 
transmissions. it's - how do you say? - a long shot, but worth trying. what do 
you think?'

    floyd's first reaction was strongly negative.

    'that will mean breaking our link with earth.'

    'of course; but we'll have to do that anyway, when we go around jupiter. and 
it will only take a couple of minutes to re-establish the circuit.'

    floyd remained silent. the suggestion was perfectly reasonable, yet it 
worried him obscurely. after puzzling for several seconds, he suddenly realized 
why he was so opposed to the idea.

    discovery's troubles had started when the big dish - the main antenna 
complex - had lost its lock on earth, for reasons which even now were not 
completely clear. but hal had certainly been involved, and there was no danger 
of a similar situation arising here. leonov's computers were small, autonomous 
units; there was no single controlling intelligence. at least, no nonhuman one.

    the russians were still waiting patiently for his answer.

    'i agree,' he said at last. 'let earth know what we're doing, and start 
listening. i suppose you'll try all the space mayday frequencies.'

    'yes, as soon as we've worked out the doppler corrections. how's it going, 
sasha?'

    'give me another two minutes, and i'll have the automatic search running. 
how long should we listen?'

    the captain barely paused before giving her answer. floyd had often admired 
tanya orlova's decisiveness, and had once told her so. in a rare flash of 
humour, she had replied: 'woody, a commander can be wrong, but never uncertain.'

    'listen for fifty minutes, and report back to earth for ten. then repeat the 
cycle.'

    there was nothing to see or hear; the automatic circuits were better at 
sifting the radio noise than any human senses. nevertheless, from time to time 
sasha turned up the audio monitor, and the roar of jupiter's radiation belts 
filled the cabin. it was a sound like the waves breaking on all the beaches of 
earth, with occasional explosive cracks from superbolts of lightning in the 
jovian atmosphere. of human signals, there was no trace; and, one by one, the 
members of the crew not on duty drifted quietly away.

    while he was waiting, floyd did some mental calculations. whatever had 
happened to tsien was already two hours in the past, since the news had been 
relayed from earth.

    but leonov should be able to pick up a direct message after less than a 
minute's delay, so the chinese had already had ample time to get back on the 
air. their continued silence suggested some catastrophic failure, and he found 
himself weaving endless scenarios of disaster.

    the fifty minutes seemed like hours. when they were up, sasha swung the 
ship's antenna complex back toward earth, and reported failure. while he was 
using the rest of the ten minutes to send a backlog of messages, he looked 
inquiringly at the captain.

    'is it worth trying again?' he said in a voice that clearly expressed his 
own pessimism.

    'of course. we may cut back the search time - but we'll keep listening.'

    on the hour, the big dish was once more focused upon europa. and almost at 
once, the automatic monitor started flashing its alert light.

    sasha's hand darted to the audio gain, and the voice of jupiter filled the 
cabin. superimposed upon that, like a whisper heard against a thunderstorm, was 
the faint but completely unmistakable sound of human speech. it was impossible 
to identify the language, though floyd felt certain, from the intonation and 
rhythm, that it was not chinese, but some european tongue.

    sasha played skilfully with fine-tuning and band-width controls, and the 
words became clearer. the language was undoubtedly english - but its content was 
still maddeningly unintelligible.

    there is one combination of sounds that every human ear can detect 
instantly, even in the noisiest environment. when it suddenly emerged from the 
jovian background, it seemed to floyd that he could not possibly be awake, but 
was trapped in some fantastic dream. his colleagues took a little longer to 
react; then they stared at him with equal amazement - and a slowly dawning 
suspicion.

    - for the first recognizable words from europa were: 'dr floyd - dr floyd - 
i hope you can hear me.'



    11

    ice and vacuum



    'who is it?' whispered someone, to a chorus of shushes. floyd raised his 
hands in a gesture of ignorance - and, he hoped, innocence.

    '... know you are aboard leonov... may not have much time... aiming my suit 
antenna where i think...' the signal vanished for agonizing seconds, then came 
back much clearer, though not appreciably louder.

    '... relay this information to earth. tsien destroyed three hours ago. i'm 
only survivor. using my suit radio - no idea if it has enough range, but it's 
the only chance. please listen carefully. there is life on europa. i repeat: 
there is life on europa.'

    the signal faded again. a stunned silence followed that no one attempted to 
interrupt. while he was waiting, floyd searched his memory furiously. he could 
riot recognize the voice - it might have been that of any western-educated 
chinese. probably it was someone he had met at a scientific conference, but 
unless the speaker identified himself he would never know.

    '... soon after local midnight. we were pumping steadily and the tanks were 
almost half full. dr lee and i went out to check the pipe insulation. tsien 
stands - stood - about thirty metres from the edge of the grand canal. pipes go 
directly from it and down through the ice. very thin - not safe to walk on. the 
warm upwelling...'

    again a long silence. floyd wondered if the speaker was moving, and had been 
momentarily cut off by some obstruction.

    '... no problem - five kilowatts of lighting strung up on the ship. like a 
christmas tree - beautiful, shining right through the ice. glorious colours. lee 
saw it first - a huge dark mass rising up from the depths. at first we thought 
it was a school of fish - too large for a single organism - then it started to 
break through the ice.

    'dr floyd, i hope you can hear me. this is professor chang - we met in '02 - 
boston iau conference.'

    instantly, incongruously, floyd's thoughts were a billion kilometres away. 
he vaguely remembered that reception, after the closing session of the 
international astronomical union congress - the last one that the chinese had 
attended before the second cultural revolution. and now he recalled chang very 
distinctly - a small, humorous astronomer and exobiologist with a good fund of 
jokes. he wasn't joking now.

    '... like huge strands of wet seaweed, crawling along the ground. lee ran 
back to the ship to get a camera - i stayed to watch, reporting over the radio. 
the thing moved so slowly i could easily outrun it. i was much more excited than 
alarmed. thought i knew what kind of creature it was - i've seen pictures of the 
kelp forests off california - but i was quite wrong.

    'i could tell it was in trouble. it couldn't possibly survive at a 
temperature a hundred and fifty below its normal environment. it was freezing 
solid as it moved forward - bits were breaking off like glass - but it was still 
advancing toward the ship, a black tidal wave, slowing down all the time.

    'i was still so surprised that i couldn't think straight and i couldn't 
imagine what it was trying to do...'

    'is there any way we can call him back?' floyd whispered urgently.

    'no - it's too late. europa will soon be behind jupiter. we'll have to wait 
until it comes out of eclipse.'

    '... climbing up the ship, building a kind of ice tunnel as it advanced. 
perhaps this was insulating it from the cold - the way termites protect 
themselves from the sunlight with their little corridors of mud.

    '... tons of ice on the ship. the radio antennas broke off first. then i 
could see the landing legs beginning to buckle - all in slow motion, like a 
dream.

    'not until the ship started to topple did i realize what the thing was 
trying to do - and then it was too late. we could have saved ourselves - if we'd 
only switched off those lights.

    'perhaps it's a phototrope, its biological cycle triggered by the sunlight 
that filters through the icc, or it could have been attracted like a moth to a 
candle. our floodlights must have been more brilliant than anything that europa 
has ever known.

    'then the ship crashed. i saw the hull split, a cloud of snowflakes form as 
moisture condensed. all the lights went out, except for one, swinging back and 
forth on a cable a couple of metres above the ground.

    'i don't know what happened immediately after that. the next thing i 
remember, i was standing under the light, beside the wreck of the ship, with a 
fine powdering of fresh snow all around me. i could see my footsteps in it very 
clearly. i must have run there; perhaps only a minute or two had elapsed.

    'the plant - i still thought of it as a plant - was motionless. i wondered 
if it had been damaged by the impact; large sections - as thick as a man's arm - 
had splintered off, like broken twigs.

    'then the main trunk started to move again. it pulled away from the hull, 
and began to crawl toward me. that was when i knew for certain that the thing 
was light-sensitive: i was standing immediately under the thousand watt lamp, 
which had stopped swinging now.

    'imagine an oak tree - better still, a banyan with its multiple trunks and 
roots - flattened out by gravity and trying to creep along the ground. it got to 
within five metres of the light, then started to spread out until it had made a 
perfect circle around me. presumably that was the limit of its tolerance - the 
point at which photo-attraction turned to repulsion. after that, nothing 
happened for several minutes. i wondered if it was dead - frozen solid at last.

    'then i saw that large buds were forming on many of the branches. it was 
like watching a time-lapse film of flowers opening. in fact i thought they were 
flowers - each about as big as a man's head.

    'delicate, beautifully coloured membranes started to unfold. even then, it 
occurred to me that no one - no thing - could ever have seen these colours 
before; they had no existence until we brought our lights - our fatal lights - 
to this world.

    'tendrils, stamens, waving feebly... i walked over to the living wall that 
surrounded me, so that i could see exactly what was happening. neither then, nor 
at any other time, had i felt the slightest fear of the creature. i was certain 
that it was not malevolent - if indeed it was conscious at all.

    'there were scores of the big flowers, in various stages of unfolding. now 
they reminded me of butterflies, just emerging from the chrysalis - wings 
crumpled, still feeble - i was getting closer and closer to the truth.

    'but they were freezing - dying as quickly as they formed. then, one after 
another, they dropped off from the parent buds. for a few moments they flopped 
around like fish stranded on dry land - at last i realized exactly what they 
were. those membranes weren't petals - they were fins, or their equivalent. this 
was the free-swimming, larval stage of the creature. probably it spends much of 
its life rooted on the seabed, then sends these mobile offspring in search of 
new territory. just like the corals of earth's oceans.

    'i knelt down to get a closer look at one of the little creatures. the 
beautiful colours were fading now to a drab brown. some of the petal-fins had 
snapped off, becoming brittle shards as they froze. but it was still moving 
feebly, and as i approached it tried to avoid me. i wondered how it sensed my 
presence.

    'then i noticed that the stamens - as i'd called them - all carried bright 
blue dots at their tips. they looked like tiny star sapphires - or the blue eyes 
along the mantle of a scallop - aware of light, but unable to form true images. 
as i watched, the vivid blue faded, the sapphires became dull, ordinary stones.

    'dr floyd - or anyone else, who is listening - i haven't much more time; 
jupiter will soon block my signal. but i've almost finished.

    'i knew then what i had to do. the cable to that thousand watt lamp was 
hanging almost to the ground. i gave it a few tugs, and the light went out in a 
shower of sparks.

    'i wondered if it was too late. for a few minutes, nothing happened. so i 
walked over to the wall of tangled branches around me, and kicked it.

    'slowly, the creature started to unweave itself, and to retreat back to the 
canal. there was plenty of light - i could see everything perfectly. ganymede 
and callisto were in the sky - jupiter was a huge, thin crescent - and there was 
a big auroral display on the nightside, at the jovian end of the io flux tube. 
there was no need to use my helmet light.

    'i followed the creature all the way back to the water, encouraging it with 
more kicks when it slowed down, feeling the fragments of ice crunching all the 
time beneath my boots... as it neared the canal, it seemed to gain strength and 
energy, as if it knew that it was approaching its natural home. i wondered if it 
would survive, to bud again.

    'it disappeared through the surface, leaving a few last dead larvae on the 
alien land. the exposed free water bubbled for a few minutes until a scab of 
protective ice sealed it from the vacuum above. then i walked back to the ship 
to see if there was anything to salvage - i don't want to talk about that.

    'i've only two requests to make, doctor. when the taxonomists classify this 
creature, i hope they'll name it after me.

    'and - when the next ship comes home - ask them to take our bones back to 
china.

    'jupiter will be cutting us off in a few minutes. i wish i knew whether 
anyone was receiving me. anyway, i'll repeat this message when we're in line of 
sight again - if my suit's life-support system lasts that long.

    'this is professor chang on europa, reporting the destruction of spaceship 
tsien. we landed beside the grand canal and set up our pumps at the edge of the 
ice -,

    the signal faded abruptly, came back for a moment, then disappeared 
completely be1ow the noise level. although leonov listened again on the same 
frequency, there was no further message from professor chang.



    iii

    discovery



    12

    downhill run



    the ship was gaining speed at last, on the downhill run toward jupiter. it 
had long since passed the gravitational no-man's-land where the four tiny outer 
moons - sinope, pasiphae, ananke, and carme - wobbled along their retrograde and 
wildly eccentric orbits. undoubtedly captured asteroids, and completely 
irregular in shape, the largest was only thirty kilometres across. jagged, 
splintered rocks of no interest to anyone except planetary geologists, their 
allegiance wavered continually between the sun and jupiter. one day, the sun 
would recapture them completely.

    but jupiter might retain the second group of four, at half the distance of 
the others. elara, lysithea, himalia, and leda were fairly close together, and 
lying in almost the same plane. there was speculation that they had once been 
part of a single body; if so, the parent would have been barely a hundred 
kilometres across.

    though only carme and leda came close enough to show disks visible to the 
naked eye, they were greeted like old friends. here was the first landfall after 
the longest ocean voyage - the offshore islands of jupiter. the last hours were 
ticking away; the most critical phase of the entire mission was approaching - 
the entry into the jovian atmosphere.

    jupiter was already larger than the moon in the skies of earth, and the 
giant inner satellites could be clearly seen moving around it. they all showed 
noticeable disks and distinctive colouring, though they were still too far away 
for any markings to be visible. the eternal ballet they performed - disappearing 
behind jupiter, reappearing to transit the daylight face with their accompanying 
shadows - was an endlessly engaging spectacle. it was one that astronomers had 
watched ever since galileo had first glimpsed it almost exactly four centuries 
ago; but the crew of leonov were the only living men and women to have seen it 
with unaided eyes.

    the interminable chess games had ceased; off-duty hours were spent at the 
telescopes, or in earnest conversation, or listening to music, usually while 
gazing at the view outside. and at least one shipboard romance had reached a 
culmination: the frequent disappearances of max brailovsky and zenia marchenko 
were the subject of much good-natured banter.

    they were, thought floyd, an oddly matched pair. max was a big, handsome 
blond who had been a champion gymnast, reaching the finals of the 2000 olympics. 
though he was in his early thirties, he had an open-faced, almost boyish 
expression. this was not altogether misleading; despite his brilliant 
engineering record, he often struck floyd as naive and unsophisticated - one of 
those people who are pleasant to talk to, but not for too long. outside his own 
field of undoubted expertise he was engaging but rather shallow.

    zenia - at twenty-nine, the youngest on board - was still something of a 
mystery. since no one wished to talk about it, floyd had never raised the 
subject of her injuries, and his washington sources could provide no 
information. obviously she had been involved in some serious accident, but it 
might have been nothing more unusual than a car crash. the theory that she had 
been on a secret space mission - still part of popular mythology outside the 
ussr - could be ruled out. thanks to the global tracking networks, no such thing 
had been possible for fifty years.

    in addition to her physical and doubtless psychological scars, zenia 
laboured under yet another handicap. she was a last-minute replacement, and 
everyone knew it. irma yakunina was to have been dietician and medical assistant 
aboard leonov before that unfortunate argument with a hang-glider broke too many 
bones.

    every day at 1800 gmt the crew of seven plus one passenger gathered in the 
tiny common room that separated the flight deck from the galley and sleeping 
quarters. the circular table at its centre was just big enough for eight people 
to squeeze around; when chandra and curnow were revived, it would be unable to 
accommodate everyone, and two extra seats would have to be fitted in somewhere 
else.

    though the 'six o'clock soviet', as the daily round-table conference was 
called, seldom lasted more than ten minutes, it played a vital role in 
maintaining morale. complaints, suggestions, criticisms, progress reports - 
anything could be raised, subject only to the captain's overriding veto, which 
was very seldom exercised.

    typical items on the non-existent agenda were requests for changes in the 
menu, appeals for more private communication time with earth, suggested movie 
programmes, exchange of news and gossip, and good-natured needling of the 
heavily-outnumbered american contingent. things would change, floyd warned them, 
when his colleagues came out of hibernation, and the odds improved from i in 7 
to 3 in 9. he did not mention his private belief that curnow could outtalk or 
outshout any three other people aboard.

    when he was not sleeping, much of floyd's own time was spent in the common 
room - partly because, despite its smallness, it was much less claustrophobic 
than his own tiny cubicle. it was also cheerfully decorated, all available flat 
surfaces being covered with photos of beautiful land and seascapes, sporting 
events, portraits of popular videostars, and other reminders of earth. pride of 
place, however, was given to an original leonov painting - his 1965 study 
'beyond the moon', made in the same year when, as a young lieutenant-colonel, he 
left voskhod ii and became the first man in history to perform an extravehicular 
excursions

    clearly the work of a talented amateur, rather than a professional, it 
showed the cratered edge of the moon with the beautiful sinus lridum - bay of 
rainbows - in the foreground. looming monstrously above the lunar horizon was 
the thin crescent of earth, embracing the darkened nightside of the planet. 
beyond that blazed the sun, the streamers of the corona reaching out into space 
for millions of kilometres around it.

    it was a striking composition - and a glimpse of the future that even then 
lay only three years ahead. on the flight of apollo 8, anders, borman and lovell 
were to see this splendid sight with their unaided eyes, as they watched earth 
rise above the farside on christmas day, 1968.

    heywood floyd admired the painting, but he also regarded it with mixed 
feelings. he could not forget that it was older than everybody else on the ship 
- with one exception.

    he was already nine years old when alexei leonov had painted it.



    13

    the worlds of galileo



    even now, more than three decades after the revelations of the first voyager 
flybys, no one really understood why the four giant satellites differed so 
wildly from one another. they were all about the same size, and in the same part 
of the solar system - yet they were totally dissimilar, as if children of a 
different birth.

    only callisto, the outermost, had turned out to be much as expected. when 
leonov raced past at a distance of just over 100,000 kilometres, the larger of 
its countless craters were clearly visible to the naked eye. through the 
telescope, the satellite looked like a glass ball that had been used as a target 
by high-powered rifles; it was completely covered with craters of every size, 
right down to the lower limit of visibility. callisto, someone had once 
remarked, looked more like earth's moon than did the moon itself.

    nor was this particularly surprising. one would have expected a world out 
here - at the edge of the asteroid belt - to have been bombarded with the debris 
left over from the creation of the solar system. yet ganymede, the satellite 
next door, had a totally different appearance. though it had been well peppered 
with impact craters in the remote past, most of them had been ploughed over - a 
phrase that seemed peculiarly appropriate. huge areas of ganymede were covered 
with ridges and furrows, as if some cosmic gardener had dragged a giant rake 
across them. and there were light-coloured streaks, like trails that might have 
been made by slugs fifty kilometres across. most mysterious of all were long, 
meandering bands, containing dozens of parallel lines. it was nikolai ternovsky 
who decided what they must be - multilane superhighways, laid out by drunken 
surveyors. he even claimed to have detected over-passes and cloverleaf 
intersections.

    leonov had added some trillions of bits of information about ganymede to the 
store of human knowledge, before it crossed the orbit of europa. that icebound 
world, with its derelict and its dead, was on the other side of jupiter, but it 
was never far from anyone's thoughts.

    back on earth, dr chang was already a hero and his countrymen had, with 
obvious embarrassment, acknowledged countless messages of sympathy. one had been 
sent in the name of leonov's crew - after, floyd gathered, considerable 
redrafting in moscow. the feeling on board the ship was ambiguous - a mixture of 
admiration, regret, and relief. all astronauts, irrespective of their national 
origins, regarded themselves as citizens of space and felt a common bond, 
sharing each other's triumphs and tragedies. no one on leonov was happy because 
the chinese expedition had met with disaster; yet at the same time, there was a 
muted sense of relief that the race had not gone to the swiftest.

    the unexpected discovery of life on europa had added a new element to the 
situation - one that was now being argued at great length both on earth and 
aboard leonov. some exobiologists cried 'i told you so!', pointing out that it 
should not have been such a surprise after all. as far back as the 1970s, 
research submarines had found teeming colonies of strange marine creatures 
thriving precariously in an environment thought to be equally hostile to life - 
the trenches on the bed of the pacific. volcanic springs, fertilizing and 
warming the abyss, had created oases of life in the deserts of the deep.

    anything that had happened once on earth should be expected millions of 
times elsewhere in the universe; that was almost an article of faith among 
scientists. water - or at least ice - occurred on all the moons of jupiter. and 
there were continuously erupting volcanoes on io - so it was reasonable to 
expect weaker activity on the world next door. putting these two facts together 
made europan life seem not only possible, but inevitable - as most of nature's 
surprises are, when viewed with 20/20 hindsight.

    yet that conclusion raised another question, and one vital to leonov's 
mission. now that life had been discovered on the moons of jupiter - did it have 
any connection with the tycho monolith, and the still more mysterious artifact 
in orbit near io?

    that was a favourite subject to debate in the six o'clock soviets. it was 
generally agreed that the creature encountered by dr chang did not represent a 
high form of intelligence - at least, if his interpretation of its behaviour was 
correct. no animal with even elementary powers of reasoning would have allowed 
itself to become a victim of its instincts, attracted like a moth to the candle 
until it risked destruction.

    vasili orlov was quick to give a counter-example that weakened, if it did 
not refute, that argument.

    'look at whales and dolphins,' he said. 'we call them intelligent - but how 
often they kill themselves in mass strandings! that looks like a case where 
instinct overpowers reason.'

    'no need to go to the dolphins,' interjected max brailovsky. 'one of the 
brightest engineers in my class was fatally attracted to a blonde in kiev. when 
i heard of him last, he was working in a garage. and he'd won a gold medal for 
designing spacestations. what a waste!'

    even if dr chang's europan was intelligent, that of course did not rule out 
higher forms elsewhere. the biology of a whole world could not be judged from a 
single specimen.

    but it had been widely argued that advanced intelligence could never arise 
in the sea; there were not enough challenges in so benign and unvarying an 
environment. above all, how could marine creatures ever develop a technology 
without the aid of fire?

    yet perhaps even that was possible; the route that humanity had taken was 
not the only one. there might be whole civilizations in the seas of other 
worlds.

    still, it seemed unlikely that a space-faring culture could have arisen on 
europa without leaving unmistakable signs of its existence in the form of 
buildings, scientific installations, launching sites, or other artifacts. but 
from pole to pole, nothing could be seen but level ice and a few outcroppings of 
bare rock.

    no time remained for speculations and discussions when leonov hurtled past 
the orbits of io and tiny mimas. the crew was busy almost non-stop, preparing 
for the encounter and the brief onset of weight after months in free-fall. all 
loose objects had to be secured before the ship entered jupiter's atmosphere, 
and the drag of deceleration produced momentary peaks that might be as high as 
two gravities.

    floyd was lucky; he alone had time to admire the superb spectacle of the 
approaching planet, now filling almost half the sky. because there was nothing 
to give it scale, there was no way that the mind could grasp its real size. he 
had to keep telling himself that fifty earths would not cover the hemisphere now 
turned toward him.

    the clouds, colourful as the most garish sunset on earth, raced so swiftly 
that he could see appreciable movement in as little as ten minutes. great eddies 
were continually forming along the dozen or so bands that girdled the planet, 
then rippling away like swirls of smoke. plumes of white gas occasionally 
geysered up from the depths, to be swept away by the gales caused by the 
planet's tremendous spin. and perhaps strangest of all were the white spots, 
sometimes spaced as regularly as pearls on a necklace, which lay along the 
tradewinds of the middle jovian latitudes.

    in the hours immediately before encounter, floyd saw little of captain or 
navigator. the orlovs scarcely left the bridge, as they continually checked the 
approach orbit and made minute refinements to leonov's course. the ship was now 
on the critical path that would just graze the outer atmosphere; if it went too 
high, frictional braking would not be sufficient to slow it down, and it would 
go racing out of the solar system, beyond all possibility of rescue. if it went 
too low, it would burn up like a meteor. between the two extremes lay little 
margin for error.

    the chinese had proved that aerobraking could be done, but there was always 
the chance that something would go wrong: so floyd was not at all surprised when 
surgeon-commander rudenko admitted, just an hour before contact: 'i'm beginning 
to wish, woody, that i had brought along that icon, after all.'



    14

    double encounter



    '... papers for the mortgage on the nantucket house should be in the file 
marked m in the library.

    'well, that's all the business i can think of. for the last couple of hours 
i've been recalling a picture i saw as a boy, in a tattered volume of victorian 
art - it must have been almost one hundred and fifty years old. i can't remember 
whether it was black-and-white or colour. but i'll never forget the title - 
don't laugh - it was called "the last message home". our great-great-
grandfathers loved that kind of sentimental melodrama.

    'it shows the deck of a windjammer in a hurricane - the sails have been 
ripped away and the deck's awash. in the background, the crew is struggling to 
save the ship. and in the foreground, a young sailor boy's writing a note, while 
beside him is the bottle he hopes will carry it to land.

    'even though i was a kid at the time, i felt he should have been giving his 
shipmates a hand, not writing letters. all the same, it moved me: i never 
thought that one day i'd be like that young sailor.

    'of course, i'm sure you'll get this message-and there's nothing i can do to 
help aboard leonov. in fact, i've been politely requested to keep out of the 
way, so my conscience is quite clear as i dictate this.

    'i'll send it up to the bridge now because in fifteen minutes we'll break 
transmission as we pull in the big dish and batten down the hatches - there's 
another nice maritime analogy for you! jupiter's filling the sky now - i won't 
attempt to describe it and won't even see it much longer because the shutters 
will go up in a few minutes. anyway, the cameras can do far better than i could.

    'goodbye, my dearest, and my love to you all - especially chris. by the time 
you get this, it will be over, one way or the other. remember i tried to do my 
best for all our sakes - goodbye.'

    when he had removed the audio chip, floyd drifted up to the communications 
centre and handed it over to sasha kovalev.

    'please make sure it gets off before we close down,' he said earnestly.

    'don't worry,' promised sasha. 'i'm still working on all channels, and we 
have a good ten minutes left.'

    he held out his hand. 'if we do meet again, why, we shall smile! if not, why 
then, this parting was well made.' floyd blinked.

    'shakespeare, i suppose?'

    'of course; brutus and cassius before battle. see you later.'

    tanya and vasili were too intent upon their situation displays to do more 
than wave to floyd, and he retreated to his cabin. he had already said farewell 
to the rest of the crew; there was nothing to do but wait. his sleeping bag was 
slung in preparation for the return of gravity when deceleration commenced, and 
he had only to climb into it - 'antennas retracted, all protective shields up,' 
said the intercom speaker. 'we should feel first braking in five minutes. 
everything normal.'

    'that's hardly the word i'd use,' floyd muttered to himself. 'i think you 
mean "nominal".' he had barely concluded the thought when there was a diffident 
knock on the door.

    'kto tam?'

    to his astonishment, it was zenia.

    'do you mind if i come in?' she asked awkwardly, in a small-girl voice which 
floyd could scarcely recognize.

    'of course not. but why aren't you in your own cubicle? it's only five 
minutes to re-entry.'

    even as he asked the question, he was aware of its foolishness. the answer 
was so perfectly obvious that zenia did not deign to reply.

    but zenia was the very last person he would have expected: her attitude 
toward him had invariably been polite but distant. indeed, she was the only 
member of the crew who preferred to call him dr floyd. yet there she was, 
clearly seeking comfort and companionship at the moment of peril.

    'zenia, my dear,' he said wryly. 'you're welcome. but my accommodation is 
somewhat limited. one might even call it spartan.'

    she managed a faint smile, but said nothing as she floated into the room. 
for the first time, floyd realized that she was not merely nervous - she was 
terrified. then he understood why she had come to him. she was ashamed to face 
her countrymen and was looking for support elsewhere.

    with this realization, his pleasure at the unexpected encounter abated 
somewhat. that did not lessen his responsibility to another lonely human being, 
a long way from home. the fact that she was an attractive - though certainly not 
beautiful - woman of barely half his own age should not have affected the issue. 
but it did; he was beginning to rise to the occasion.

    she must have noticed, but did nothing to encourage or discourage him as 
they lay down side by side in the sleeping cocoon. there was just enough room 
for them both, and floyd began to do some anxious calculations. suppose maximum 
gee was higher than predicted, and the suspension gave way? they could easily be 
killed...

    there was an ample safety margin; no need to worry about such an ignominious 
end. humour was the enemy of desire; their embrace was now completely chaste. he 
was not sure whether to be glad or sorry.

    and it was too late for second thoughts. from far, far away came the first 
faint whisper of sound, like the wailing of some lost soul. at the same moment, 
the ship gave a barely perceptible jerk; the cocoon began to swing around and 
its suspension tightened. after weeks of weightlessness, gravity was returning.

    within seconds, the faint wail had risen to a steady roar, and the cocoon 
had become an overloaded hammock. this is not such a good idea, floyd thought to 
himself, already it was difficult to breathe. the deceleration was only a part 
of the problem: zenia was clutching him as a drowning person is supposed to 
clutch the proverbial straw.

    he detached her as gently as he could.

    'it's all right, zenia. if tsien did it, so can we. relax - don't worry.'

    it was difficult to shout tenderly, and he was not even sure if zenia heard 
him above the roar of incandescent hydrogen. but she was no longer clutching him 
quite so desperately, and he seized the opportunity of taking a few deep 
breaths.

    what would caroline think if she could see him now? would he tell her if he 
ever had the chance? he was not sure she would understand. at a moment like 
that, all links with earth seemed very tenuous indeed.

    it was impossible to move, or to speak, but now that he had grown accustomed 
to the strange sense of weight he was no longer uncomfortable - except for the 
increasing numbness in his right arm. with some difficulty, he managed to 
extricate it from beneath zenia; the familiar act brought a fleeting sense of 
guilt. as he felt his circulation returning, floyd remembered a famous remark 
attributed to at least a dozen astronauts and cosmonauts: 'both the pleasures 
and problems of zero-gravity sex have been greatly exaggerated.'

    he wondered how the rest of the crew was faring, and he gave a momentary 
thought to chandra and curnow, sleeping peacefully through it all. they would 
never know if leonov became a meteor shower in the jovian sky. he did not envy 
them; they had missed the experience of a lifetime.

    tanya was speaking over the intercom; her words were lost in the roar, but 
her voice sounded calm and perfectly normal, just as if she was making a routine 
announcement. floyd managed to glance at his watch, and was astonished to see 
that they were already at the midpoint of the braking manoeuvre. at that very 
moment, leonov was at its closest approach to jupiter; only expendable automatic 
probes had gone deeper into the jovian atmosphere.

    'halfway through, zenia,' he shouted. 'on the way out again.' he could not 
tell if she understood. her eyes were tightly closed, but she smiled slightly.

    the ship was now rocking noticeably, like a small boat in a choppy sea. was 
that normal? wondered floyd. he was glad that he had zenia to worry about; it 
took his mind away from his own fears. just for a moment, before he managed to 
expel the thought, he had a vision of the walls suddenly glowing cherry red, and 
caving in upon him. like the nightmare fantasy of edgar allan poe's 'the pit and 
the pendulum', which he'd forgotten for thirty years.

    but that would never happen. if the heat shield failed, the ship would 
crumble instantly, hammered flat by a solid wall of gas. there would be no pain; 
his nervous system would not have time to react before it ceased to exist. he 
had experienced more consoling thoughts, but this one was not to be despised.

    the buffeting slowly weakened. there was another inaudible announcement from 
tanya (he would pull her leg about that, when it was all over). now time seemed 
to be going much more slowly; after a while he stopped looking at his watch, 
because he could not believe it. the digits changed so slowly that he could 
almost imagine himself in some einsteinian time dilation.

    and then something even more unbelievable happened. first he was amused, 
then slightly indignant. zenia had fallen asleep - if not exactly in his arms, 
then at least beside them.

    it was a natural reaction: the strain must have exhausted her, and the 
wisdom of the body had come to her rescue. and suddenly floyd himself became 
aware of an almost post-orgasmic drowsiness, as if he too had been emotionally 
drained by the encounter. he had to fight to remain awake.

    and then he was falling... falling... falling... it was all over. the ship 
was back in space, where it belonged. and he and zenia were floating apart.

    they would never again be so close together, but they would always know a 
special tenderness toward each other, which no one else could ever share.



    15

    escape from the giant



    when floyd reached the observation deck - a discreet few minutes after zenia 
- jupiter already seemed farther away. but that must be an illusion based on his 
knowledge, not the evidence of his eyes. they had barely emerged from the jovian 
atmosphere, and the planet still filled half the sky.

    and now they were - as intended - its prisoners. during the last 
incandescent hour, they had deliberately jettisoned the excess speed that could 
have carried them right out of the solar system, and on to the stars. now they 
were travelling in an ellipse - a classical hohmann orbit - which would shuttle 
them back between jupiter and the orbit of io, 350,000 kilometres higher. if 
they did not - or could not - fire their motors again, leonov would swing back 
and forth between these limits, completing one revolution every nineteen hours. 
it would become the closest of jupiter's moons - though not for long. each time 
it grazed the atmosphere it would lose altitude, until it spiralled into 
destruction.

    floyd had never really enjoyed vodka, but he joined the others without any 
reservations in drinking a triumphant toast to the ship's designers, coupled 
with a vote of thanks to sir isaac newton. then tanya put the bottle firmly back 
in its cupboard; there was still much to be done.

    though they were all expecting it, everyone jumped at the sudden muffled 
thud of explosive charges, and the jolt of separation. a few seconds later, a 
large, still-glowing disk floated into view, slowly turning end-over-end as it 
drifted away from the ship.

    'look!' cried max. 'a flying saucer! who's got a camera?' there was a 
distinct note of hysterical relief in the laughter that followed. it was 
interrupted by the captain, in a more serious vein.

    'goodbye, faithful heat shield! you did a wonderful job.'

    'but what a waste!' said sasha. 'there's at least a couple of tons left, 
think of all the extra payload we could have carried!'

    'if that's good, conservative russian engineering,' retorted floyd, 'then 
i'm all for it. far better a few tons too much - than one milligram too little.'

    everyone applauded those noble sentiments as the jetti soned shield cooled 
to yellow, then red, and finally became as black as the space around it. it 
vanished from sight while only a few kilometres away, though occasionally the 
sudden reappearance of an eclipsed star would betray its presence.

    'preliminary orbit check completed,' said vasili. 'we're within ten metres a 
second of our right vector. not bad for a first try.'

    there was a subdued sigh of relief at the news, and a few minutes later 
vasili made another announcement.

    'changing attitude for course correction; delta vee six metres a second. 
twenty-second burn coming up in one minute.'

    they were still so close to jupiter it was impossible to believe that the 
ship was orbiting the planet; they might have been in a high-flying aircraft 
that had just emerged from a sea of clouds. there was no sense of scale; it was 
easy to imagine that they were speeding away from some terrestrial sunset; the 
reds and pinks and crimsons sliding below were so familiar.

    and that was an illusion; nothing here had any parallels with earth. those 
colours were intrinsic, not borrowed from the setting sun. the very gases were 
utterly alien - methane and ammonia and a witch's brew of hydrocarbons, stirred 
in a hydrogen-helium cauldron. not one trace of free oxygen, the breath of human 
life.

    the clouds marched from horizon to horizon in parallel rows, distorted by 
occasional swirls and eddies. here and there upwellings of brighter gas broke 
the pattern, and floyd could also see the dark rim of a great whirlpool, a 
maelstrom of gas leading down into unfathomable jovian depths.

    he began to look for the great red spot, then quickly checked himself at 
such a foolish thought. all the enormous cloudscape he could see below would be 
only a few per cent of the red spot's immensity; one might as well expect to 
recognize the shape of the united states from a small aeroplane flying low above 
kansas.

    'correction completed. we're now on interception orbit with io. arrival 
time: eight hours, fifty-five minutes.'

    less than nine hours to climb up from jupiter and meet whatever is waiting 
for us, thought floyd. we've escaped from the giant - but he represents a danger 
we understood, and could prepare for. what lies ahead now is utter mystery.

    and when we have survived that challenge, we must return to jupiter once 
again. we shall need his strength to send us safely home.



    16

    private line



    '... hello, dimitri. this is woody, switching to key two in fifteen 
seconds... hello, dimitri - multiply keys three and four, take cube root, add pi 
squared and use nearest integer as key five. unless your computers are a million 
times faster than ours - and i'm damn sure they're not - no one can decrypt 
this, on your side or mine. but you may have some explaining to do; anyway, 
you're good at that.

    'by the way, my usual excellent sources told me about the failure of the 
latest attempt to persuade old andrei to resign; i gather that your delegation 
had no more luck than the others, and you're still saddled with him as 
president. i'm laughing my head off; it serves the academy right. i know he's 
over ninety, and growing a bit - well, stubborn. but you won't get any help from 
me, even though i'm the world's - sorry, solar system's - leading expert on the 
painless removal of elderly scientists.

    'would you believe that i'm still slightly drunk? we felt we deserved a 
little party, once we'd successfully rendez - rendezvous, damn, rendezvoused 
with discovery. besides, we had two new crew members to welcome aboard. chandra 
doesn't believe in alcohol - it makes you too human - but walter curnow more 
than made up for him, only tanya remained stone-cold sober, just as you'd 
expect.

    'my fellow americans - i sound like a politician, god help me - came out of 
hibernation without any problems, and are both looking forward to starting work. 
we'll all have to move quickly; not only is time running out, but discovery 
seems to be in very bad shape. we could hardly believe our eyes when we saw how 
its spotless white hull had turned a sickly yellow.

    'io's to blame, of course. the ship's spiralled down to within three 
thousand kilometres, and every few days one of the volcanoes blasts a few 
megatons of sulphur up into the sky. even though you've seen the movies, you 
can't really imagine what it's like to hang above that inferno; i'll be glad 
when we can get away, even though we'll be heading for something much more 
mysterious - and perhaps far more dangerous.

    'i flew over kilauea during the '06 eruption; that was mighty scary, but it 
was nothing - nothing - compared to this. at the moment, we're over the 
nightside, and that makes it worse. you can see just enough to imagine a lot 
more. it's as close to hell as i ever want to get.

    'some of the sulphur lakes are hot enough to glow, but most of the light 
comes from electrical discharges. every few minutes the whole landscape seems to 
explode, as if a giant photoflash has gone off above it. and that's probably not 
a bad analogy; there are millions of amps flowing in the flux-tube linking io 
and jupiter, and every so often there's a breakdown. then you get the biggest 
lightning flash in the solar system, and half our circuit-breakers jump out in 
sympathy.

    'there's just been an eruption right on the terminator, and i can see a huge 
cloud expanding up toward us, climbing into the sunlight. i doubt if it will 
reach our altitude, and even if it does it will be harmless by the time it gets 
here. but it looks ominous - a space monster, trying to devour us.

    'soon after we got here, i realized that io reminded me of something; it 
took me a couple of days to work it out, and then i had to check with mission 
archives because the ship's library couldn't help - shame on it. do you remember 
how i introduced you to the lord of the rings, when we were kids back at that 
oxford conference? well, io is mordor: look up part three. there's a passage 
about "rivers of molten rock that wound their way... until they cooled and lay 
like twisted dragon-shapes vomited from the tormented earth." that's a perfect 
description: how did tolkien know, a quarter century before anyone ever saw a 
picture of io? talk about nature imitating art.

    'at least we won't have to land there: i don't think that even our late 
chinese colleagues would have attempted that. but perhaps one day it may be 
possible; there are areas that seem fairly stable, and not continually inundated 
by sulphur floods.

    'who would have believed that we'd come all the way to jupiter, greatest of 
planets - and then ignore it. yet that's what we're doing most of the time; and 
when we're not looking at io or discovery, we're thinking about the artifact.

     'it's still ten thousand kilometres away, up there at the libration point, 
but when i look at it through the main telescope it seems close enough to touch. 
because it's so completely featureless, there's no indication of size, no way 
the eye can judge it's really a couple of kilometres long. if it's solid, it 
must weigh billions of tons.

    'but is it solid? it gives almost no radar echo, even when it's square-on to 
us. we can see it only as a black silhouette against the clouds of jupiter, 
three hundred thousand kilometres below. apart from its size, it looks exactly 
like the monolith we dug up on the moon.

    'well, tomorrow we'll go aboard discovery, and i don't know when i'll have 
time or opportunity to speak to you again. but there's one more thing, old 
friend, before i sign off.

    'it's caroline. she's never really understood why i had to leave earth, and 
in a way i don't think she'll ever quite forgive me. some women believe, that 
love isn't the only thing - but everything. perhaps they're right... anyway, 
it's certainly too late to argue now.

    'try and cheer her up when you have a chance. she talks about going back to 
the mainland. i'm afraid that if she does...

    'if you can't get through to her, try to cheer up chris. i miss him more 
than i care to say.

    'he'll believe uncle dimitri - if you say that his father still loves him, 
and will be coming home just as quickly as he can.'



    17

    boarding party



    even in the best of circumstances, it is not easy to board a derelict and 
uncooperative spaceship. indeed, it can be positively dangerous.

    walter curnow knew that as an abstract principle; but he did not really feel 
it in his bones until he saw the entire hundred-metre length of discovery 
turning end-over-end, while leonov kept at a safe distance. years ago, friction 
had braked the spin of discovery's carousel, thus transferring its angular 
momentum to the rest of the structure. now, like a drum-majorette's baton at the 
height of its trajectory, the abandoned ship was slowly tumbling along its 
orbit.

    the first problem was to stop that spin, which made discovery not only 
uncontrollable but almost unapproachable. as he suited up in the airlock with 
max brailovsky, curnow had a very rare sensation of incompetence, even 
inferiority; it was not his line of business. he had already explained gloomily, 
'i'm a space engineer, not a space monkey'; but the job had to be done. he alone 
possessed the skills that could save discovery from io's grasp. max and his 
colleagues, working with unfamiliar circuit diagrams and equipment, would take 
far too long. by the time they had restored power to the ship and mastered its 
controls, it would have plunged into the sulphurous firepits below.

    'you're not scared, are you?' asked max, when they were about to put on 
their helmets.

    'not enough to make a mess in my suit. otherwise, yes.' max chuckled. 'i'd 
say that's about right for this job. but don't worry - i'll get you there in one 
piece, with my - what do you call it?'

    'broomstick. because witches are supposed to ride them.'

    'oh yes. have you ever used one?'

    'i tried once, but mine got away from me. everyone else thought it was very 
funny.'

    there are some professions which have evolved unique and characteristic 
tools - the longshoreman's hook, the potter's wheel, the bricklayer's trowel, 
the geologist's hammer. the men who had to spend much of their time on zero-
gravity construction projects had developed the broomstick.

    it was very simple - a hollow tube just a metre long, with a footpad at one 
end and a retaining loop at the other. at the touch of a button, it could 
telescope out to five or six times its normal length, and the internal shock-
absorbing system allowed a skilled operator to perform the most amazing 
manoeuvres. the footpad could also become a claw or hook if necessary; there 
were many other refinements, but that was the basic design. it looked 
deceptively easy to use; it wasn't.

    the airlock pumps finished recycling; the exit sign came on; the outer doors 
opened, and they drifted slowly into the void.

    discovery was windmilling about two hundred metres away, following them in 
orbit around io, which filled half the sky. jupiter was invisible, on the other 
side of the satellite. this was a matter of deliberate choice; they were using 
io as a shield to protect them from the energies raging back and forth in the 
flux-tube that linked the two worlds. even so, the radiation level was 
dangerously high; they had less than fifteen minutes before they must get back 
to shelter.

    almost immediately, curnow had a problem with his suit. 'it fitted me when i 
left earth,' he complained. 'but now i'm rattling around inside like a pea in a 
pod.'

    'that's perfectly normal, walter,' said surgeon-commander rudenko, breaking 
into the radio circuit. 'you lost ten kilos in hibernation, which you could very 
well afford to miss. and you've already put three of them back.'

    before curnow had time to think of a suitable retort, he found himself 
gently but firmly jerked away from leonov.

    'just relax, walter,' said brailovsky. 'don't use your thrusters, even if 
you start tumbling. let me do all the work.'

    curnow could see the faint puffs from the younger man's backpack, as its 
tiny jets drove them toward discovery. with each little cloud of vapour there 
came a gentle tug on the towline, and he would start moving toward brailovsky; 
but he never caught up with him before the next puff came. he felt rather like a 
yo-yo - now making one of its periodic comebacks on earth - bouncing up and down 
on its string.

    there was only one safe way to approach the derelict, and that was along the 
axis around which it was slowly revolving. discovery's centre of rotation was 
approximately amidships, near the main antenna complex, and brailovsky was 
heading directly toward this area, with his anxious partner in tow. how will he 
stop both of us in time? curnow asked himself.

    discovery was now a huge, slender dumbbell slowly flailing the entire sky 
ahead of them. though it took several minutes to complete one revolution, the 
far ends were moving at an impressive speed. curnow tried to ignore them, and 
concentrated on the approaching - and immobile - centre.

    'i'm aiming for that,' said brailovsky. 'don't try to help, and don't be 
surprised at anything that happens.'

    now, what does he mean by that? curnow asked himself, while preparing to be 
as unsurprised as possible.

    everything happened in about five seconds. brailovsky triggered his 
broomstick, so that it telescoped out to its full length of four metres and made 
contact with the approaching ship. the broomstick started to collapse, its 
internal spring absorbing brailovsky's considerable momentum; but it did not, as 
curnow had fully expected, bring him to rest beside the antenna mount. it 
immediately expanded again, reversing the russian's velocity so that he was, in 
effect, reflected away from discovery just as rapidly as he had approached. he 
flashed past curnow, heading out into space again, only a few centimetres away. 
the startled american just had time to glimpse a large grin before brailovsky 
shot past him.

    a second later, there was a jerk on the line connecting them, and a quick 
surge of deceleration as they shared momentum. their opposing velocities had 
been neatly cancelled; they were virtually at rest with respect to discovery. 
curnow had merely to reach out to the nearest handhold, and drag them both in.

    'have you ever tried russian roulette?' he asked, when he had got his breath 
back.

    'no - what is it?'

    'i must teach you sometime. it's almost as good as this for curing boredom.'

    'i hope you're not suggesting, walter, that max would do anything 
dangerous?'

    dr rudenko sounded as if she was genuinely shocked, and curnow decided it 
was best not to answer; sometimes the russians did not understand his peculiar 
sense of humour. 'you could have fooled me,' he muttered under his breath, not 
loud enough for her to hear.

    now that they were firmly attached to the hub of the windmilling ship, he 
was no longer conscious of its rotation - especially when he fixed his gaze upon 
the metal plates immediately before his eyes. the ladder stretching away into 
the distance, running along the slender cylinder that was discovery's main 
structure, was his next objective. the spherical command module at its far end 
seemed several light-years away, though he knew perfectly well that the distance 
was only fifty metres.

    'i'll go first,' said brailovsky, reeling in the slack on the line linking 
them together. 'remember - it's downhill all the way from here. but that's no 
problem - you can hold on with one hand. even at the bottom, gravity's only 
about a tenth gee. and that's - what do you say? - chickenshit.'

    'i think you mean chickenfeed. and if it's all the same to you, i'm going 
feet first. i never liked crawling down ladders the wrong way up - even in 
fractional gravity.'

    it was essential, curnow was very well aware, to keep up this gently 
bantering tone; otherwise he would be simply overwhelmed by the mystery and 
danger of the situation. there he was, almost a billion kilometres from home, 
about to enter the most famous derelict in the entire history of space 
exploration; a media reporter had once called discovery the marie celeste of 
space, and that was not a bad analogy. but there was also much that made his 
situation unique; even if he tried to ignore the nightmare moonscape filling 
half the sky, there was a constant reminder of its presence at hand. every time 
he touched the rungs of the ladder, his glove dislodged a thin mist of sulphur 
dust.

    brailovsky, of course, was quite correct; the rotational gravity caused by 
the ship's end-over-end tumbling was easily countered. as he grew used to it, 
curnow even welcomed the sense of direction it gave him.

    and then, quite suddenly, they had reached the big, discoloured sphere of 
discovery's control and life-support module. only a few metres away was an 
emergency hatch - the very one, curnow realized, that bowman had entered for his 
final confrontation with hal.

    'hope we can get in,' muttered brailovsky. 'pity to come all this way and 
find the door locked.'

    he scraped away the sulphur obscuring the airlock status display panel.

    'dead, of course. shall i try the controls?'

    'won't do any harm - but nothing will happen.'

    'you're right. well, here goes with manual...

    it was fascinating to watch the narrow hairline open in the curved wall, and 
to note the little puff of vapour dispersing into space, carrying with it a 
scrap of paper. was that some vital message? they would never know; it spun 
away, tumbling end over end without losing any of its initial spin as it 
disappeared against the stars.

    brailovsky kept turning the manual control for what seemed a very long time, 
before the dark, uninviting cave of the airlock was completely open. curnow had 
hoped that the emergency lights, at least, might still be operating. no such 
luck.

    'you're boss now, walter. welcome to us territory.'

    it certainly did not look very welcoming as he clambered inside, flashing 
the beam of his helmet light around the interior. as far as curnow could tell, 
everything was in good order. what else had he expected? he asked himself, half 
angrily.

    closing the door manually took even longer than opening it, but there was no 
alternative until the ship was powered up again. just before the hatch was 
sealed, curnow risked a glance at the insane panorama outside.

    a flickering blue lake had opened up near the equator; he was sure it had 
not been there a few hours earlier. brilliant yellow flares, the characteristic 
colour of glowing sodium, were dancing along its edges; and the whole of the 
nightland was veiled in the ghostly plasma discharge of one of io's almost 
continuous auroras.

    it was the stuff of future nightmares - and as if that was not sufficient, 
there was one further touch worthy of a mad surrealist artist. stabbing up into 
the black sky, apparently emerging directly from the firepits of the burning 
moon, was an immense, curving horn, such as a doomed bullfighter might have 
glimpsed in the final moment of truth.

    the crescent of jupiter was rising to greet discovery and leonov as they 
swept toward it along their common orbit.



    18

    salvage



    the moment that the outer hatch had closed behind them, there had been a 
subtle reversal of roles. curnow was at home now, while brailovsky was out of 
his element, feeling ill at ease in the labyrinth of pitch-black corridors and 
tunnels that was discovery's interior. in theory, max knew his way round the 
ship, but that knowledge was based only on a study of its design drawings. 
curnow, on the other hand, had spent months working in discovery's still 
uncompleted identical twin; he could, quite literally, find his way around 
blindfolded.

    progress was made difficult because that part of the ship was designed for 
zero gee; now the uncontrolled spin provided an artificial gravity, which, 
slight though it was, always seemed to be in the most inconvenient direction.

    'first thing we've got to do,' muttered curnow, after sliding several metres 
down a corridor before he could grab a handhold, 'is to stop this damned spin. 
and we can't do that until we have power. i only hope that dave bowman 
safeguarded all systems before he abandoned ship.'

    'are you sure he did abandon the ship? he may have intended to come back.'

    'you may be right; i don't suppose we'll ever know. if he even knew 
himself.'

    they had now entered the pod bay - discovery's 'space garage', which 
normally contained three of the spherical one-man modules used for activities 
outside the ship. only pod number 3 remained; number 1 had been lost in the 
mysterious accident that had killed frank poole - and number 2 was with dave 
bowman, wherever he might be.

    the pod bay also contained two spacesuits, looking uncomfortably like 
decapitated corpses as they hung helmet-less in their racks. it needed very 
little effort of the imagination - and brailovsky's was now working overtime - 
to fill them with a whole menagerie of sinister occupants.

    it was unfortunate, but not altogether surprising, that curnow's sometimes 
irresponsible sense of humour got the better of him at this very moment.

    'max,' he said, in a tone of deadly seriousness, 'whatever happens - please 
don't go chasing off after the ship's cat.'

    for a few milliseconds, brailovsky was thrown off guard; he almost answered: 
'i do wish you hadn't said that, walter', but checked himself in time. that 
would have been too damning an admission of weakness; instead he replied, 'i'd 
like to meet the idiot who put that movie in our library.'

    'katerina probably did it, to test everyone's psychological balance. anyway, 
you laughed your head off when we screened it last week.'

    brailovsky was silent; curnow's remark was perfectly true. but that had been 
back in the familiar warmth and light of leonov, among his friends - not in a 
pitch-black, freezing derelict, haunted by ghosts. no matter how rational one 
was, it was all too easy to imagine some implacable alien beast prowling these 
corridors, seeking whom it might devour.

    it's all your fault, grandma (may the siberian tundra lie lightly on your 
beloved bones) - i wish you hadn't filled my mind with so many of those gruesome 
legends. if i close my eyes, i can still see the hut of the baba yaga, standing 
in that forest clearing on its scrawny chicken legs...

    enough of this nonsense. i'm a brilliant young engineer faced with the 
biggest technical challenge of his life, and i mustn't let my american friend 
know that i'm sometimes a frightened little boy.

    the noises did not help. there were too many of them, though they were so 
faint that only an experienced astronaut would have detected them against the 
sounds of his own suit. but to max brailovsky, accustomed to working in an 
environment of utter silence, they were distinctly unnerving, even though he 
knew that the occasional cracklings and creakings were almost certainly caused 
by thermal expansion as the ship turned like a roast on a spit. feeble though 
the sun was out here, there was still an appreciable temperature change between 
light and shade.

    even his familiar spacesuit felt wrong, now that there was pressure outside 
as well as in. all the forces acting on its joints were subtly altered, and he 
could no longer judge his movements accurately. i'm a beginner, starting my 
training all over again, he told himself angrily. time to break the mood by some 
decisive action.

    'walter - i'd like to test the atmosphere.'

    'pressure's okay; temperature - phew - it's one hundred five below zero.'

    'a nice bracing russian winter. anyway, the air in my suit will keep out the 
worst of the cold.'

    'well, go ahead. but let me shine my light on your face, so i can see if you 
start to turn blue. and keep talking.'

    brailovsky unsealed his visor and swung the faceplate upward. he flinched 
momentarily as icy fingers seemed to caress his cheeks, then took a cautious 
sniff, followed by a deeper breath.

    'chilly - but my lungs aren't freezing. there's a funny smell, though. 
stale, rotten - as if something's - oh no!'

    looking suddenly pale, brailovsky quickly snapped the faceplate shut.

    'what's the trouble, max?' curnow asked with sudden and now perfectly 
genuine anxiety. brailovsky did not reply; he looked as if he was still trying 
to regain control of himself. indeed, he seemed in real danger of that always 
horrible and sometimes fatal disaster - vomiting in a spacesuit.

    there was a long silence; then curnow said reassuringly:

    'i get it. but i'm sure you're wrong. we know that poole was lost in space. 
bowman reported that he... ejected the others after they died in hibernation - 
and we can be sure that he did. there can't be anyone here. besides, it's so 
cold.' he almost added 'like a morgue' but checked himself in time.

    'but' suppose,' whispered brailovsky, 'just suppose bowman managed to get 
back to the ship - and died here.'

    there was an even longer silence before curnow deliberately and slowly 
opened his own faceplate. he winced as the freezing air bit into his lungs, then 
wrinkled his nose in disgust.

    'i see what you mean. but you're letting your imagination run away with you. 
i'll bet you ten to one that smell comes from the galley. probably some meat 
went bad, before the ship froze up. and bowman must have been too busy to be a 
good housekeeper. i've known bachelor apartments that smelled as bad as this.'

    'maybe you're right. i hope you are.'

    'of course i am. and even if i'm not - dammit, what difference does it make? 
we've got a job to do, max. if dave bowman's still here, that's not our 
department - is it, katerina?'

    there was no reply from the surgeon-commander; they had gone too far inside 
the ship for radio to penetrate. they were indeed on their own, but max's 
spirits were rapidly reviving. it was a privilege, he decided, to work with 
walter. the american engineer sometimes appeared soft and easygoing. but he was 
totally competent - and, when necessary, as hard as nails.

    together, they would bring discovery back to life; and, perhaps, back to 
earth.



    19

    operation windmill



    when discovery suddenly lit up like the proverbial christmas tree, 
navigation and interior lights blazing from end to end, the cheer aboard leonov 
might almost have been heard across the vacuum between the two ships. it turned 
into an ironic groan when the lights promptly went out again.

    nothing else happened for half an hour; then the observation windows of 
discovery's flight deck began to glow with the soft crimson of the emergency 
lights. a few minutes later, curnow and brailovsky could be seen moving around 
inside, their figures blurred by the film of sulphur dust.

    'hello, max - walter - can you hear us?' called tanya orlova. both the 
figures waved instantly, but made no other reply. obviously, they were too busy 
to engage in casual conversation; the watchers on leonov had to wait patiently 
while various lights flashed on and off, one of the three pod bay doors slowly 
opened and quickly closed, and the main antenna slewed around a modest ten 
degrees.

    'hello, leonov,' said curnow at last. 'sorry to keep you waiting, but we've 
been rather busy.

    'here's a quick assessment, judging from what we've seen so far. the ship's 
in much better shape than i feared. hull's intact, leakage negligible - air 
pressure eighty-five per cent nominal. quite breathable, but we'll have to do a 
major recycling job because it stinks to high heaven.

    'the best news is that the power systems are okay. main reactor stable, 
batteries in good shape. almost all the circuit-breakers were open - they'd 
jumped or been thrown by bowman before he left - so all vital equipment's been 
safeguarded. but it will be a very big job checking everything before we have 
full power again.'

    'how long will that take - at least for the essential systems: life-support, 
propulsion?'

    'hard to say, skipper. how long before we crash?'

    'minimum present prediction is ten days. but you know how that's changed up 
- and down.'

    'well, if we don't run into any major snags, we can haul discovery up to a 
stable orbit away from this hellhole - oh, i'd say inside a week.'

    'anything you need?'

    'no - max and i are doing fine. we're going into the carousel now, to check 
the bearings. i want to get it running as soon as possible.'

    'pardon me, walter - but is that important? gravity's convenient, but we've 
managed without any for quite a while.'

    'i'm not after gravity, though it will be useful to have some aboard. if we 
can get the carousel running again, it will mop up the ship's spin - stop it 
tumbling. then we'll be able to couple our airlocks together, and cut out evas. 
that will make work a hundred times easier.'

    'nice idea, walter - but you're not going to mate my ship to that... 
windmill. suppose the bearings seize up and the carousel jams? that would tear 
us to pieces.'

    'agreed. we'll cross that bridge when we come to it. i'll report again as 
soon as i can.'

    no one had much rest for the next two days. by the end of that time, curnow 
and brailovsky had practically fallen asleep in their suits, but had completed 
their survey of discovery and found no unpleasant surprises. both the space 
agency and the state department were relieved by the preliminary report; it 
allowed them to claim, with some justification, that discovery was not a 
derelict but a 'temporarily decommissioned united states spacecraft'. now the 
task of reconditioning had to begin.

    once power had been restored, the next problem was the air; even the most 
thorough housecleaning operations had failed to remove the stink. curnow had 
been right in identifying its source as food spoiled when refrigeration had 
failed; he also claimed, with mock seriousness, that it was quite romantic. 
'i've only got to close my eyes,' he asserted, 'and i feel i'm back on an old-
time whaling ship. can you imagine what the pequod must have smelled like?'

    it was unanimously agreed that, after a visit to discovery, very little 
effort of the imagination was required. the problem was finally solved - or at 
least reduced to manageable proportions - by dumping the ship's atmosphere. 
fortunately, there was still enough air in the reserve tanks to replace it.

    one piece of very welcome news was that ninety per cent of the propellant 
needed for the return journey was still available; choosing ammonia instead of 
hydrogen as working fluid for the plasma drive had paid off handsomely. the more 
efficient hydrogen would have boiled off into space years ago, despite the 
insulation of the tanks and the frigid temperature outside. but almost all the 
ammonia had remained safely liquified, and there was enough to get the ship back 
to a safe orbit around the earth. or at least around the moon.

    checking discovery's propellerlike spin was perhaps the most critical step 
in getting the ship under control. sasha kovalev compared curnow and brailovsky 
to don quixote and sancho panza, and expressed the hope that their windmill-
tilting expedition would end more successfully.

    very cautiously, with many pauses for checking, power was fed to the 
carousel motors and the great drum was brought up to speed, reabsorbing the spin 
it had long ago imparted to the ship. discovery executed a complex series of 
precessions, until eventually its end-over-end tumble had almost vanished. the 
last traces of unwanted rotation were neutralized by the attitude-control jets, 
until the two ships were floating motionless side by side, the squat, stocky 
leonov dwarfed by the long, slender discovery.

    transfer from one to the other was now safe and easy, but captain orlova 
still refused to permit a physical linkup. everyone agreed with this decision, 
for io was coming steadily closer; they might yet have to abandon the vessel 
they had worked so hard to save.

    the fact that they now knew the reason for discovery's mysterious orbital 
decay did not help in the least. every time the ship passed between jupiter and 
io, it sliced through the invisible flux-tube linking the two bodies - the 
electric river flowing from world to world. the resulting eddy currents induced 
in the ship were continually slowing it down, braking it once every revolution.

    there was no way to predict the final moment of impact, for the current in 
the flux-tube varied wildly according to jupiter's own inscrutable laws. 
sometimes there were dramatic surges of activity accompanied by spectacular 
electric and auroral storms around io. then the ships would lose altitude by 
many kilometres, at the same time becoming uncomfortably hot before their 
thermal control systems could readjust.

    this unexpected effect had scared and surprised everyone before the obvious 
explanation was realized. any form of braking produces heat, somewhere; the 
heavy currents induced in the hulls of leonov and discovery turned them briefly 
into low-powered electric furnaces. it was not surprising that some of 
discovery's food supply had been ruined during the years the ship had been 
alternately cooked and cooled.

    the festering landscape of io, looking more than ever like an illustration 
from a medical textbook, was only five hundred kilometres away when curnow 
risked activating the main drive, while leonov stood off at a very respectful 
distance. there were no visible effects - none of the smoke and fire of the old-
time chemical rockets - but the two ships drew slowly apart as discovery gained 
speed. after a few hours of very gentle manoeuvring, both ships had raised 
themselves a thousand kilometres; now there was time to relax briefly, and to 
make plans for the next stage in the mission.

    'you've done a wonderful job, walter,' said surgeon-commander rudenko, 
putting her ample arm around the exhausted curnow's shoulders. 'we're all proud 
of you.'

    very casually, she broke a small capsule under his nose. it was twenty-four 
hours before he woke up, annoyed and hungry.



    20

    guillotine



    'what is it?' asked curnow with mild distaste, hefting the little mechanism 
in his hand. 'a guillotine for mice?'

    'not a bad description - but i'm after bigger game.' floyd pointed to a 
flashing arrow on the display screen, which was now showing a complicated 
circuit diagram.

    'you see this line?'

    'yes - the main power supply. so?'

    'this is the point where it enters hal's central processing unit. i'd like 
you to install this gadget here. inside the cable trunking, where it can't be 
found without a deliberate search.'

    'i see. a remote control, so you can pull the plug on hal whenever you want 
to. very neat - and a non-conducting blade, too, so there won't be any 
embarrassing shorts when it's triggered. who makes toys like this? the cia?'

    'never mind. the control's in my room - that little red calculator i always 
keep on my desk. put in nine nines, take the square root, and press tnt. that's 
all. i'm not sure of its range - we'll have to test that - but as long as leonov 
and discovery are within a couple of kilometres of each other, there'll be no 
danger of hal running amok again.'

    'who are you going to tell about this... thing?'

    'well, the only person i'm really hiding it from is chandra.'

    'i guessed as much.'

    'but the fewer who know, the less likely it is to be talked about. i'll tell 
tanya that it exists, and if there's an emergency you can show her how to 
operate it.'

    'what kind of emergency?'

    'that's not a very bright question, walter. if i knew, i wouldn't need the 
damn thing.'

    'guess you're right. when do you want me to install your patented hal-
zapper?'

    'as soon as you can. preferably tonight. when chandra's sleeping.'

    'are you kidding? i don't think he ever sleeps. he's like a mother nursing a 
sick baby.'

    'well, he's got to come back to leonov to eat, occasionally.'

    'i've news for you. the last time he went across, he tied a little sack of 
rice to his suit. that will keep him going for weeks.'

    'then we'll have to use one of katerina's famous knockout drops. they did a 
pretty good job on you, didn't they?'

    curnow was joking about chandra - at least, floyd assumed that he was, 
though one could never be quite sure: he was fond of making outrageous 
statements with a perfectly straight face. it had been some time before the 
russians had fully realized that; soon, in self-defence, they were prone to pre-
emptive laughs even when curnow was being perfectly serious.

    curnow's own laugh, mercifully, had much abated since floyd had first heard 
it in the upward-bound shuttle; on that occasion, it had obviously been primed 
by alcohol. he had fully expected to cringe from it again at the end-of-orbit 
party, when leonov had finally made rendezvous with discovery. but even on that 
occasion, though curnow had drunk a good deal, he had remained as much under 
control as captain orlova herself.

    the one thing he did take seriously was his work. on the way up from earth, 
he had been a passenger. now he was crew.



    21

    resurrection



    we are, floyd told himself, about to awaken a sleeping giant. how will hal 
react to our presence, after all these years? what will he remember of the past 
- and will he be friendly, or hostile?

    as he floated just behind dr chandra in the zero-gravity environment of 
discovery's flight deck, floyd's mind was seldom far from the cut-off switch, 
installed and tested only a few hours earlier. the radio control was mere 
centimetres from his hand, and he felt somewhat foolish to have brought it with 
him. at this stage, hal was still disconnected from all the ship's operational 
circuits. even if he was reactivated, he would be a brain without limbs though 
not without sense organs. he would be able to communicate, but not to act. as 
curnow had put it, 'the worst he can do is swear at us.'

    'i'm ready for the first test, captain,' said chandra. 'all the missing 
modules have been replaced, and i've run diagnostic programs on all circuits. 
everything appears normal, at least on this level.'

    captain orlova glanced at floyd, who gave a nod. at chandra's insistence, 
only the three of them were present for this critical first run, and it was 
quite obvious that even this small audience was unwelcome.

    'very well, dr chandra.' ever conscious of protocol, the captain added 
quickly: 'dr floyd has given his approval, and i have no objections myself.'

    'i should explain,' said chandra, in a tone that clearly conveyed 
disapproval, 'that his voice-recognition and speech-synthesis centres have been 
damaged. we'll have to teach him to speak all over again. luckily, he learns 
several million times faster than a human being.'

    the scientist's fingers danced over the keyboard as he typed out a dozen 
words, apparently at random, carefully pronouncing each one as it appeared on 
the screen. like a distorted echo, the words came back from the speaker grille - 
lifeless, indeed mechanical, with no sense of any intelligence behind them. this 
isn't the old hal, thought floyd. it's no better than the primitive speaking 
toys that were such a novelty when i was a kid.

    chandra pressed the repeat button, and the series of words sounded once 
again. already, there was a noticeable improvement, though no one could have 
mistaken the speaker for a human being.

    'the words i gave him contain the basic english phonemes; about ten 
iterations, and he'll be acceptable. but i don't have the equipment to do a 
really good job of therapy.'

    'therapy?' asked floyd. 'you mean that 'he's - well, brain-damaged?'

    'no,' snapped chandra. 'the logic circuits are in perfect condition. only 
the voice output may be defective, though it will improve steadily. so check 
everything against the visual display, to avoid misinterpretations. and when you 
do speak, enunciate carefully.'

    floyd gave captain orlova a wry smile, and asked the obvious question.

    'what about all the russian accents around here?'

    'i'm sure that won't be a problem with captain orlova and dr kovalev. but 
with the others - well, we'll have to run individual tests. anyone who can't 
pass will have to use the keyboard.'

    'that's still looking a long way ahead. for the present, you're the only 
person who should attempt communication. agreed, captain?'

    'absolutely.'

    only the briefest of nods revealed that dr chandra had heard them. his 
fingers continued to fly over the keyboard, and columns of words and symbols 
flashed across the display screen at such a rate that no human being could 
possibly assimilate them. presumably chandra had an eidetic memory, for he 
appeared to recognize whole pages of information at a glance.

    floyd and orlova were just about to leave the scientist to his arcane 
devotions when he suddenly acknowledged their presence again, holding up his 
hand in warning or anticipation. with an almost hesitant movement, in marked 
contrast with his previous swift actions, he slid back a locking bar and pressed 
a single, isolated key.

    instantly, with no perceptible pause, a voice came from the console, no 
longer in a mechanical parody of human speech. there was intelligence - 
consciousness - self-awareness here, though as yet only on a rudimentary level.

    'good morning, dr chandra, this is hal. i am ready for my first lesson.'

    there was a moment of shocked silence; then, acting on the same impulse, the 
two observers left the deck.

    heywood floyd would never have believed it. dr chandra was crying.



    iv

    lagrange



    22

    big brother



    '... what delightful news about the baby dolphin! i can just imagine how 
excited chris was when the proud parents brought it into the house. you should 
have heard the ohs and ahs of my shipmates when they saw the videos of them 
swimming together, and chris riding on its back. they suggest we call it 
sputnik, which means companion as well as satellite.

    'sorry it's been quite a while since my last message, but the newscasts will 
have given you an idea of the huge job we've had to do. even captain tanya's 
given up all pretence of a regular schedule; each problem has to be fixed as it 
comes along, by whoever is on the spot. we sleep when we can't stay awake any 
longer.

    'i think we can all be proud of what we've done. both ships are operational 
and we've nearly finished our first round of tests on hal. in a couple of days 
we'll know if we can trust him to fly discovery when we leave here to make our 
final rendezvous with big brother.

    'i don't know who first gave it that name - the russians, understandably, 
aren't keen on it. and they've waxed quite sarcastic about our official 
designation tma-2, pointing out to me - several times - that it's the best part 
of a billion kilometres from tycho. also that bowman reported no magnetic 
anomaly, and that the only resemblance to tma-1 is the shape. when i asked them 
what name they preferred, they came up with zagadka, which means enigma. it's 
certainly an excellent name; but everyone smiles when i try to pronounce it, so 
i'll stick to big brother.

    'whatever you call the thing, it's only ten thousand kilometres away now, 
and the trip won't take more than a few hours. but that last lap has us all 
nervous, i don't mind telling you.

    'we'd hoped that we might find some new information aboard discovery. that's 
been our only disappointment, though we should have expected it. hal, of course, 
was disconnected long before the encounter, and so has no memories of what 
happened; bowman has taken all his secrets with him. there's nothing in the 
ship's log and automatic recording systems that we didn't already know.

    'the only new item we discovered was purely personal - a message that bowman 
had left for his mother. i wonder why he never sent it; obviously, he did expect 
- or hope - to return to the ship after that last eva. of course, we've had it 
forwarded to mrs bowman - she's in a nursing home, somewhere in florida, and her 
mental condition is poor, so it may not mean anything to her.

    'well, that's all the news this time. i can't tell you how much i miss 
you... and the blue skies and green seas of earth. all the colours here are reds 
and oranges and yellows - often as beautiful as the most fantastic sunset, but 
after a while one grows sick for the cool, pure rays at the other end of the 
spectrum.

    'my love to you both - i'll call again just as soon as i can.'



    23

    rendezvous



    nikolai temovsky, leonov's control and cybernetics expert, was the only man 
aboard who could talk to dr chandra on something like his own terms. although 
hal's principal creator and mentor was reluctant to admit anyone into his full 
confidence, sheer physical exhaustion had forced him to accept help. russian and 
indo-american had formed a temporary alliance, which functioned surprisingly 
well. most of the credit for this went to the good-natured nikolai, who was 
somehow able to sense when chandra really needed him, and when he preferred to 
be alone. the fact that nikolai's english was much the worst on the ship was 
totally unimportant, since most of the time both men spoke a computerese wholly 
unintelligible to anyone else.

    after a week's slow and careful reintegration, all of hal's routine, 
supervisory functions were operating reliably. he was like a man who could walk, 
carry out simple orders, do unskilled jobs, and engage in low-level 
conversation. in human terms, he had an intelligence quotient of perhaps 50; 
only the faintest outlines of his original personality had yet emerged.

    he was still sleepwalking; nevertheless, in chandra's expert opinion, he was 
now quite capable of flying discovery from its close orbit around io up to the 
rendezvous with big brother.

    the prospect of getting an extra seven thousand kilometres away from the 
burning hell beneath them was welcomed by everyone. trivial though that distance 
was in astronomical terms, it meant that the sky would no longet be dominated by 
a landscape that might have been imagined by dante or hieronymus bosch. and 
although not even the most violent eruptions had blasted any material up to the 
ships, there was always the fear that io might attempt to set a new record. as 
it was, visibility from leonov's observation deck was steadily degraded by a 
thin film of sulphur, and sooner or later someone would have to go out and clean 
it off.

    only curnow and chandra were aboard discovery when hal was given the first 
control of the ship. it was a very limited form of control; he was merely 
repeating the program that had been fed into his memory, and monitoring its 
execution. and the human crew was monitoring him: if any malfunction occurred, 
they would take over immediately.

    the first burn lasted for ten minutes; then hal reported that discovery had 
entered the transfer orbit. as soon as leonov's radar and optical tracking 
confirmed that, the other ship injected itself into the same trajectory. two 
minor in-course corrections were made; then, three hours and fifteen minutes 
later, both arrived uneventfully at the first lagrange point, l. 1 - 10,500 
kilometres up, on the invisible line connecting the centres of io and jupiter.

    hal had behaved impeccably, and chandra showed unmistakable traces of such 
purely human emotions as satisfaction and even joy. but by that time, everyone's 
thoughts were elsewhere; big brother, alias zagadka, was only a hundred 
kilometres away.

    even from that distance, it already appeared larger than the moon as seen 
from earth, and shockingly unnatural in its straight-edged, geometrical 
perfection. against the background of space it would have been completely 
invisible, but the scudding jovian clouds 350,000 kilometres below showed it up 
in dramatic relief. they also produced an illusion that, once experienced, the 
mind found almost impossible to refute. because there was no way in which its 
real location could be judged by the eye, big brother often looked like a 
yawning trapdoor set in the face of jupiter.

    there was no reason to suppose that a hundred kilometres would be 'safer 
than ten, or more dangerous than a thousand; it merely seemed psychologically 
right for a first reconnaissance. from that distance, the ship's telescopes 
could have revealed details only centimetres across -but there were none to be 
seen. big brother appeared completely featureless; which, for an object that 
had, presumably, survived millions of years of bombardment by space debris, was 
incredible.

    when floyd stared through the binocular eyepiece, it seemed to him that he 
could reach out and touch those smooth, ebon surfaces - just as he had done on 
the moon, years ago. that first time, it had been with the gloved hand of his 
spacesuit. not until the tycho monolith had been enclosed in a pressurized dome 
had he been able to use his naked hand.

    that had made no difference; he did not feel that he had ever really touched 
tma-1. the tips of his fingers had seemed to skitter over an invisible barrier, 
and the harder he pushed, the greater the repulsion grew. he wondered if big 
brother would produce the same effect.

    yet before they came that close, they had to make every test they could 
devise and report their observations to earth. they were in much the same 
position as explosives experts trying to defuse a new type of bomb, which might 
be detonated by the slightest false move. for all that they could tell, even the 
most delicate of radar probes might trigger some unimaginable catastrophe.

    for the first twenty-four hours, they did nothing except observe with 
passive instruments - telescopes, cameras, sensors on every wavelength. vasili 
orlov also took the opportunity of measuring the slab's dimensions with the 
greatest possible precision, and confirmed the famous 1:4:9 ratio to six decimal 
places. big brother was exactly the same shape as tma-1 - but as it was more 
than two kilometres long, it was 718 times larger than its small sibling.

    and there was a second mathematical mystery. men had been arguing for years 
over that 1:4:9 ratio - the squares of the first three integers. that could not 
possibly be a coincidence; now here was another number to conjure with.

    back on earth, statisticians and mathematical physicists were soon playing 
happily with their computers, trying to relate the ratio to the fundamental 
constants of nature - the velocity of light, the proton/electron mass ratio, the 
fine-structure constant. they were quickly joined by a gaggle of numerologists, 
astrologers, and mystics, who threw in the height of the great pyramid, the 
diameter of stonehenge, the azimuth bearings of the nazca lines, the latitude of 
easter island, and a host of other factors from which they were able to draw the 
most amazing conclusions about the future. they were not in the least deterred 
when a celebrated washington humorist claimed that his calculations proved that 
the world ended on 31 december 1999 - but that everyone had had too much of a 
hangover to notice.

    nor did big brother appear to notice the two ships that had arrived in its 
vicinity - even when they cautiously probed it with radar beams and bombarded it 
with strings of radio pulses which, it was hoped, would encourage any 
intelligent listener to answer in the same fashion.

    after two frustrating days, with the approval of mission control, the ships 
halved their distance. from fifty kilometres, the largest face of the slab 
appeared about four times the width of the moon in earth's sky - impressive, but 
not so large as to be psychologically overwhelming. it could not yet compete 
with jupiter, ten times larger still; and already the mood of the expedition was 
changing from awed alertness to a certain impatience.

    walter curnow spoke for almost everyone: 'big brother may be willing to wait 
a few million years - we'd like to get away a little sooner.'



    24

    reconnaissance



    discovery had left earth with three of the little space pods that allowed an 
astronaut to perform extravehicular activities in shirt-sleeve comfort. one had 
been lost in the accident - if it was an accident - that had killed frank poole. 
another had carried dave bowman to his final appointment with big brother, and 
shared whatever fate befell him, a third was still in the ship's garage, the pod 
bay.

    it lacked one important component - the hatch, blown off by commander bowman 
when he had made his hazardous vacuum-crossing and entered the ship through the 
emergency airlock, after hal had refused to open the pod bay door. the resulting 
blast of air had rocketed the pod several hundred kilometres away before bowman, 
busy with more important matters, had brought it back under radio control. it 
was not surprising that he had never bothered to replace the missing hatch.

    now pod number 3 (on which max, refusing all explanations, had stencilled 
the name nina) was being prepared for another eva. it still lacked a hatch, but 
that was unimportant. no one would be riding inside.

    bowman's devotion to duty was a piece of unexpected luck, and it would have 
been folly not to take advantage of it. by using nina as a robot probe, big 
brother could be examined at close quarters without risking human lives. that at 
least was the theory; no one could rule out the possibility of a backlash that 
might engulf the ship. after all, fifty kilometres was not even a hair's 
breadth, as cosmic distances went.

    after years of neglect, nina looked distinctly shabby. the dust that was 
always floating around in zero gee had settled over the outer surface, so that 
the once immaculately white hull had become a dingy grey. as it slowly 
accelerated away from the ship, its external manipulators folded neatly back and 
its oval viewport staring spaceward like a huge, dead eye, it did not seem a 
very impressive ambassador of mankind. but that was a distinct advantage; so 
humble an emissary might be tolerated, and its small size and low velocity 
should emphasize its peaceful intentions. there had been a suggestion that it 
should approach big brother with open hands; the idea was quickly turned down 
when almost everyone agreed that if they saw nina heading toward them, 
mechanical claws outstretched, they would run for their lives.

    after a leisurely two-hour trip, nina came to rest a hundred metres from one 
corner of the huge rectangular slab. from so close at hand, there was no sense 
of its true shape; the tv cameras might have been looking down on the tip of a 
black tetrahedron of indefinite size. the onboard instruments showed no sign of 
radioactivity or magnetic fields; nothing whatsoever was coming from big brother 
except the tiny fraction of sunlight it condescended to reflect.

    after five minutes' pause - the equivalent, it was intended, of 'hello, here 
i am!' - nina started a diagonal crossing of the smaller face, then the next 
larger, and finally the largest, keeping at a distance of about fifty metres, 
but occasionally coming in to five. whatever the separation, big brother looked 
exactly the same - smooth and featureless. long before the mission was 
completed, it had become boring, and the spectators on both ships had gone back 
to their various jobs, only glancing at the monitors from time to time.

    'that's it,' said walter curnow at last, when nina had arrived back where 
she had started. 'we could spend the rest of our lives doing this, without 
learning anything more. what do i do with nina - bring her home?'

    'no,' said vasili, breaking into the circuit from aboard leonov. 'i've a 
suggestion. take her to the exact centre of the big face. bring her to rest - 
oh, a hundred metres away. and leave her parked there, with the radar switched 
to maximum precision.'

    'no problem - except that there's bound to be some residual drift. but 
what's the point?'

    'i've just remembered an exercise from one of my college astronomy courses - 
the gravitational attraction of an infinite flat plate. i never thought i'd have 
a chance of using it in real life. after i've studied nina's movements for a few 
hours, at least i'll be able to calculate zagadka's mass, that is, if it has 
any. i'm beginning to think there's nothing really there.'

    'there's an easy way to settle that, and we'll have to do it eventually. 
nina must go in and touch the thing.'

    'she already has.'

    'what do you mean?' asked curnow, rather indignantly. 'i never got nearer 
than five metres.'

    'i'm not criticizing your driving skills - though it was a pretty close 
thing at that first corner, wasn't it? but you've been tapping gently on zagadka 
every time you use nina's thrusters near its surface.'

    'a flea jumping on an elephant!'

    'perhaps. we simply don't know. but we'd better assume that, one way or 
another, it's aware of our presence, and will only tolerate us as long as we 
aren't a nuisance.'

    he left the unspoken question hanging in the air. how did one annoy a two-
kilometre-long black rectangular slab? and just what form would its disapproval 
take?



    25

    the view from lagrange



    astronomy was full of such intriguing but meaningless coincidences. the most 
famous was the fact that, from the earth, both sun and moon have the same 
apparent diameter. here at the l.1 libration point, which big brother had chosen 
for its cosmic balancing act on the gravitational tightrope between jupiter and 
io, a similar phenomenon occurred. planet and satellite appeared exactly the 
same size.

    and what a size! not the miserable half-degree of sun and moon, but forty 
times their diameter - sixteen hundred times their area. 'the sight of either 
was enough to fill the mind with awe and wonder; together, the spectacle was 
overwhelming.

    every forty-two hours, they would go through their complete cycle of phases; 
when io was new, jupiter was full, and vice versa. but even when the sun was 
hiding behind jupiter and the planet presented only its nightside, it was 
unmistakably there - a huge black disk eclipsing the stars. sometimes that 
blackness would be momentarily rent by lightning flashes lasting for many 
seconds, from electrical storms far larger than the earth.

    on the opposite side of the sky, always keeping the same face toward its 
giant master, io would be a sluggishly boiling cauldron of reds and oranges, 
with occasional yellow clouds erupting from one of its volcanoes, and falling 
swiftly back to the surface. like jupiter, but on a slightly longer time scale, 
io was a world without geography. its face was remodelled in a matter of decades 
- jupiter's, in a matter of days.

    as io waned toward its last quarter, so the vast, intricately banded jovian 
cloudscape would light up beneath the tiny, distant sun. sometimes the shadow of 
io itself, or one of the outer satellites, would drift across the face of 
jupiter; while every revolution would show the planet-sized vortex of the great 
red spot - a hurricane that had endured for centuries if not for millennia.

    poised between such wonders, the crew of leonov had material for lifetimes 
of research - but the natural objects of the jovian system were at the very 
bottom of their list of priorities. big brother was number 1; though the ships 
had now moved in to only five kilometres, tanya still refused to allow any 
direct physical contact. 'i'm going to wait,' she said, 'until we're in a 
position to make a quick getaway. we'll sit and watch - until our launch window 
opens. then we'll consider our next move.'

    it was true that nina had finally grounded on big brother, after a leisurely 
fifty-minute fall. this had allowed vasili to calculate the object's mass as a 
surprisingly low 950,000 tons, which gave it about the density of air. 
presumably it was hollow - which provoked endless speculation about what might 
be inside.

    but there were plenty of practical, everyday problems to take their minds 
off these greater issues. housekeeping chores aboard leonov and discovery 
absorbed ninety per cent of their working time, though operations' were much 
more efficient since the two ships had been coupled by a flexible docking 
connection. curnow had finally convinced tanya that discovery's carousel would 
not suddenly seize up and tear the ships to pieces, so it had become possible to 
move freely from one vessel to the other merely by opening and closing two sets 
of airtight doors. spacesuits and time-consuming evas were no longer necessary - 
to the great delight of everyone except max, who loved going outside and 
exercising with his broomstick.

    the two crew members quite unaffected by this were chandra and ternovsky, 
who now virtually lived aboard discovery and worked around the clock, continuing 
their apparently endless dialogue with hal. 'when will you be ready?' they were 
asked at least once a day. they refused to make any promises; hal remained a 
low-grade moron.

    then, a week after the rendezvous with big brother, chandra unexpectedly 
announced: 'we're ready.'

    only the two lady medics were absent from discovery's flight deck, and that 
was merely because there was no room for them; they were watching on leonov's 
monitors. floyd stood immediately behind chandra, his hand never far from what 
curnow, with his usual gift for the neat phrase, had called his pocket giant-
killer.

    'let me emphasize again,' said chandra, 'that thmre must be no talking. your 
accents will confuse him; i can speak, but no one else. is that understood?'

    chandra looked, and sounded, at the edge of exhaustion. yet his voice held a 
note of authority that no one had ever heard before. tanya might be the boss 
everywhere else, but he was master there.

    the audience - some anchored to convenient handholds, some floating freely - 
nodded assent. chandra closed an audio switch and said, quietly but clearly: 
'good morning, hal.'

    an instant later, it seemed to floyd that the years had rolled away. it was 
no longer a simple electronic toy that answered back. hal had returned.

    'good morning, dr chandra.'

    'do you feel capable of resuming your duties?'

    'of course. i am completely operational and all my circuits are functioning 
perfectly.'

    'then do you mind if i ask you a few questions?'

    'not at all.'

    -do you recall a(failure of the ae 35 antenna control unit?'

*   'certainly net.'

    despate chandra's inhunction, there }as a little gasx from the listefers. 
this is nike tiptoeing tbrough a minefiedd, thought floyf, as he patted |he 
reassuring*shape of the radio cut-off. if vhat line of que{tioning triggered 
another psyahosis, he could(kill hal in a second. (he knew, having rehearsel the 
procedure a dozen times.) but a second was aeons to a computer; that was(a 
chance they*would have to tkke.

    'you(do not remember*either dave bowgan or frank poole going out to replace 
the ae"35 unit?'

  * 'no. that coull not have happeded, or i would jave remembered it. where are 
frank and dave? ]ho are these pegple? i can only*identify you - vhough i compute 
a sixty-five rer cent probabifity that the mal behind you is dr heywood floyd&'

    remembmring chandra's strict injunctiol, floyd refrainod from congratunating 
hal. after a decade, sixty-five per cen| was a pretty geod score. many humans 
would nmt have done so uell.

    'don't worry, hal -(i will explain mverything later&'

    'has tbe mission been completed? you klow i have the greatest enthusiasm for 
it.'

    'the mission has been complmted; you have cirried out your program. now - in 
you will excwse us - we wish(to have a priva~e conversation./

    'certaifly.'

    chaldra switched ofd sound and visimn inputs to the*main console. as far as 
this xart of the ship(was concerned, bal was now deaf"and blind.

    'well, what wis all that abouv?' demanded vascli orlov.

    'it means,' said chandra, carefully and precisely, 'that i havm erased all 
hal's memories, bmginning at the eoment when the |rouble started.-

    'that seunds quite a feat,' marvelled sisha. 'how did yeu do it?'

  ( 'i am afraid iv would take me longer to explail than it did to"carry out the 
operation.'

"   'chandra, i im a computer exrert - though not in the same class as you and 
_nikolai. the 9020 series uses hglographic memories, doesn't it? so you couldn't 
have used a simple chronological erasure. it must have been some kind of 
tapeworm, homing on selected words and concepts?'

    'tapeworm?' said katerina over the ship's intercom. 'i thought that was my 
department - though i'm glad to say i've never seen one of the beastly things 
outside a jar of alcohol. what are you talking about?'

    'computer jargon, katerina. in the old days - the very old days - they 
really did use magnetic tape. and it's possible to construct a program that can 
be fed into a system to hunt down and destroy - eat, if you like - any desired 
memories. 'can't you do the same sort of thing to human beings, by hypnosis?'

    'yes, but it can always be reversed. we never really forget anything. we 
only think we do.'

    'a computer doesn't work that way. when it's told to forget something, it 
does. the information is completely erased.'

    'so hal has absolutely no memory of his... misbehaviour?'

    'i cannot be a hundred per cent certain of that,' answered chandra. 'there 
may be some memories that were in transit from one address to another when 
the... tapeworm was making its search. but this is very unlikely.'

    'fascinating,' said tanya, after everyone had thought this over in silence 
for some time. 'but the much more important question is: can he be relied upon 
in future?'

    before chandra could answer, floyd anticipated him.

    'the same set of circumstances can never arise again; i can promise you 
that. the whole trouble started because it's difficult to explain security to a 
computer.'

    'or to human beings,' muttered curnow, not very sotto voce.

    'i hope you're right,' said tanya, without much conviction. 'what's the next 
step, chandra?'

    'nothing so tricky - merely long and tedious. now we have to program him to 
initiate the jupiter escape sequence - and to bring discovery home. three years 
after we've got back on our high-speed orbit.'



    26

    probation



    to: victor millson, chairman, national council on astronautics, washington

    from: heywood floyd, aboard ussc discovery

    subject: malfunction of onboard computer hal 9000

    classification: secret



    dr chandrasegarampillai (hereinafter referred to as dr c.) has now completed 
his preliminary examination of hal. he has restored all missing modules and the 
computer appears to be fully operational. details of dr c.'s actions and 
conclusions will be found in the report he and dr ternovsky will submit shortly.

    meanwhile you have asked me to summarize them in non-technical terms for the 
benefit of the council - especially the new members who will not be familiar 
with the background. frankly, i doubt my ability to do this; as you know, i am 
not a computer specialist. but i will do my best.

    the problem was apparently caused by a conflict between hal's basic 
instructions and the requirements of security. by direct presidential order, the 
existence of tma-1 was kept a complete secret. only those with a need to know 
were permitted access to the information.

    discovery's mission to jupiter was already in the advanced planning stage 
when tma-1 was excavated, and radiated its signal to that planet. as the 
function of the prime crew (bowman. poole) was merely to get the vessel to its 
destination, it was decided that they should not be informed of its new 
objective. by training the investigative team (kaminski, hunter, whitehead) 
separately, and placing them in hibernation before the voyage began, it was felt 
that a much higher degree of security would be attained, as the danger of leaks 
(accidental or otherwise) would be greatly reduced.

    i would like to remind you that, at the time (my memorandum nca 342/23/top 
secret of 01.04.03) i pointed out several objections to this policy. however, 
they were overruled at a higher level.

    as hal was capable of operating the ship without human assistance, it was 
also decided that he should be programmed to carry out the mission autonomously 
in the event of the crew's being incapacitated or killed. he was therefore given 
full knowledge of its objectives, but was not permitted to reveal them to bowman 
or poole.

    this situation conflicted with the purpose for which hal had been designed - 
the accurate processing of information without distortion or concealment. as a 
result, hal developed what would be called, in human terms, a psychosis - 
specifically, schizophrenia. dr c. informs me that, in technical terminology, 
hal became trapped in a hofstadter-moebius loop, a situation apparently not 
uncommon among advanced computers with autonomous goal-seeking programs. he 
suggests that for further information you contact professor hofstadter himself.

    to put it crudely (if i understand dr c.) hal was faced with an intolerable 
dilemma, and so developed paranoiac symptoms that were directed against those 
monitoring his performance back on earth. he accordingly attempted to break the 
radio link with mission control, first by reporting a (non-existent) fault in 
the ae 35 antenna unit.

    this involved him not only in a direct lie - which must have aggravated his 
psychosis still further - but also in a confrontation with the crew. presumably 
(we can only guess at this, of course) he decided that the only way out of the 
situation was to eliminate his human colleagues - which he very nearly succeeded 
in doing. looking at the matter purely objectively, it would have been 
interesting to see what would have happened had he continued the mission alone, 
without man-made 'interference'.

    this is virtually all i have been able to learn from dr c.; i do not like to 
question him further, as he is working to the point of exhaustion. but even 
allowing for this fact, i must frankly state (and please keep this absolutely 
confidential) that dr c. is not always as cooperative as he should be. he adopts 
a defensive attitude toward hal, which sometimes makes it extremely difficult to 
discuss the subject. even dr ternovsky, who might have been expected to be a 
little more independent, often appears to share this viewpoint.

    however, the only really important question is: can hal be relied upon in 
the future? dr c., of course, has no doubts on the matter. he claims to have 
obliterated all the computer's memories of the traumatic events leading up to 
the disconnection. nor does he believe that hal can suffer from anything 
remotely analogous to the human sense of guilt.

    in any case, it seems impossible that the situation that caused the original 
problem can ever arise again. although hal suffers from a number of 
peculiarities, they are not of a nature that would cause any apprehension; they 
are merely minor annoyances, some of them even amusing. and as you know - but dr 
c. does not - i have taken steps that will give us complete control as a last 
resort.

    to sum up: the rehabilitation of hal 9000 is proceeding satisfactorily. one 
might even say that he is on probation.

    i wonder if he knows it.



    27

    interlude: true confessions



    the human mind has an astonishing capacity to adapt; after a while, even the 
incredible becomes commonplace. there were times when the crew of leonov 
switched off their surroundings, perhaps in an unconscious move to preserve 
sanity.

    dr heywood floyd often thought that, on such occasions, walter curnow worked 
a little too hard at being the life and soul of the party. and though he 
triggered what sasha kovalev later called the 'true confessions' episode, he 
certainly had not planned anything of the sort. it arose spontaneously when he 
voiced the universal dissatisfaction with almost all aspects of zero-gravity 
plumbing.

    'if i could have one wish granted,' he exclaimed during the daily six 
o'clock soviet, 'it would be to soak in a nice foaming bathtub, scented with 
essence of pine and with just my nose above the waterline.'

    when the murmurs of assent and sighs of frustrated desire had died away, 
katerina rudenko took up the challenge.

    'how splendidly decadent, walter,' she beamed at him with cheerful 
disapproval. 'it makes you sound like a roman emperor. if i were back on earth, 
i'd like something more active.'

    'such as?'

    'umm... am i allowed to go back in time as well?'

    'if you like.'

    'when i was a girl, i used to go for holidays to a collective farm in 
georgia. there was a beautiful palomino stallion, bought by the director out of 
the money he'd made on the local black market. he was an old scoundrel, but i 
loved him - and he used to let me gallop alexander all over the countryside. i 
might have been killed - but that's the memory that brings earth back to me, 
more than anything else.'

    there was a moment of thoughtful silence; then curnow asked, 'any other 
volunteers?'

    everyone seemed so lost in their own memories that the game might have ended 
there, had not maxim brailovsky started it off again.

    'i'd like to be diving - that was just about my favourite hobby, when i had 
time for one - and i was glad i could keep it up through my cosmonaut training. 
i've dived off pacific atolls, the great barrier reef, the red sea - coral reefs 
are the most beautiful places in the world. yet the experience i remember best 
was in quite a different place - one of the japanese kelp forests. it was like 
an underwater cathedral, with sunlight slanting through those enormous leaves. 
mysterious... magical. i've never been back; perhaps it wouldn't be the same the 
next time. but i'd like to try.'

    'fine,' said walter, who as usual had appointed himself master of 
ceremonies. 'who's next?'

    'i'll give you a quick answer,' said tanya orlova. 'the bolshoi - swan lake. 
but vasili won't agree. he hates ballet.'

    'that makes two of us. anyway, what would you select, vasili?'

    'i was going to say diving, but max beat me to it. so i'll go in the 
opposite direction - gliding. soaring through the clouds on a summer day, in 
complete silence. well, not quite complete - the airflow over the wing can get 
noisy, especially when you're banking. that's the way to enjoy earth- like a 
bird.'

    'zenia?'

    'easy. skiing in the pamirs. i love snow.'

    'and you, chandra?'

    the atmosphere changed noticeably when walter put the question. after all 
this time, chandra was still a stranger - perfectly polite, even courteous, but 
never revealing himself.

    'when i was a boy,' he said slowly, 'my grandfather took me on a pilgrimage 
to varanasi - benares. if you've never been there, i'm afraid you won't 
understand. to me - to many indians even nowadays, whatever their religion - 
it's the centre of the world. one day i plan to go back.'

    'and you, nikolai?'

    'well, we've had the sea and sky. i'd like to combine both. my favourite 
sport used to be wind-surfing. i'm afraid i'm too old for it now - but i'd like 
to find out.'

    'that only leaves you, woody. what's your choice?'

    floyd did not even stop to think; his spontaneous answer surprised himself 
as much as the others.

    'i don't mind where on earth i am - as long as i'm with my little son.'

    after that, there was no more to be said. the session was over.



    28

    frustration



    'you've seen all the technical reports, dimitri, so you'll understand our 
frustration. we've learned nothing new from all our tests and measurements. 
zagadka just sits there, filling half the sky, ignoring us completely.

    'yet it can't be inert - an abandoned space derelict. vasili has pointed out 
that it must be taking some positive action, to remain here at the unstable 
libration point. otherwise it would have drifted away ages ago, just as 
discovery did, and crashed into io.

    'so what do we do next? we wouldn't have nuclear explosives on board, would 
we, in contravention of un '08, para 3? i'm only joking.

    'now that we're under less pressure, and the launch window for the homeward 
trip is still weeks away, there's a distinct feeling of boredom, as well as 
frustration. don't laugh - i can imagine how that sounds to you, back in moscow. 
how could any intelligent person get bored out here, surrounded by the greatest 
marvels human eyes have ever seen?

    'yet there's no doubt of it. morale isn't what it was. until now, we've all 
been disgustingly healthy. now almost everyone has a minor cold, or an upset 
stomach, or a scratch that won't heal despite all of katerina's pills and 
powders. she's given up now, and just swears at us.

    'sasha has helped to keep us amused with a series of bulletins on the ship's 
bulletin board. their theme is: stamp out russlish! and he lists horrid mixtures 
of both languages he claims to have overheard, wrong uses of words, and so 
forth. we'll all need linguistic decontamination when we get home; several times 
i've come across your countrymen chatting in english without even being aware of 
it, lapsing into their native tongue only for difficult words. the other day i 
caught myself talking russian to walter curnow - and neither of us noticed for 
several minutes.

    'there was one bit of unscheduled activity the other day that will tell you 
something about our state of mind. the fire alarm went off in the middle of the 
night, triggered by one of the smoke detectors.

    'well, it turned out that chandra had smuggled some of his lethal cigars 
aboard, and couldn't resist temptation anymore. he was smoking one in the 
toilet, like a guilty schoolboy.

    'of course, he was horribly embarrassed; everyone else thought it 
hysterically funny, after the initial panic. you know the way some perfectly 
trivial joke, which doesn't mean a thing to outsiders, can sweep through a group 
of otherwise intelligent people and reduce them to helpless laughter. one had 
only to pretend to light a cigar for the next few days, and everybody would go 
to pieces.

    'what makes it even more ridiculous is that no one would have minded in the 
least if chandra had just gone into an airlock, or switched off the smoke 
detector. but he was too shy to admit that he had such a human weakness; so now 
he spends even more of his time communing with hal.'

    floyd pressed the pause button and stopped the recording. perhaps it was not 
fair to make fun of chandra, tempting though it often was. all sorts of little 
quirks of personality had surfaced during the last few weeks; there had even 
been some bad quarrels, for no obvious reason. and for that matter, what of his 
own behaviour? had that always been above criticism?

    he was still not sure if he had handled curnow properly. though he did not 
suppose that he would ever really like the big engineer, or enjoy the sound of 
his slightly too-loud voice, floyd's attitude toward him had changed from mere 
tolerance to respectful admiration. the russians adored him, not least because 
his rendering of such favourites as 'polyushko polye' often reduced them to 
tears. and in one case, floyd felt that the adoration had gone a little too far.

    'walter,' he had begun cautiously, 'i'm not sure if it's my business, but 
there's a personal matter i'd like to raise with you...'

    'when someone says it's not his business, he's usually right. what's the 
problem?'

    'to be blunt, your behaviour with max.'

    there was a frigid silence, which floyd occupied with a careful inspection 
of the poor paintjob on the opposite wall. then curnow replied, in a soft yet 
implacable voice: 'i was under the distinct impression that he was more than 
eighteen.'

    'don't confuse the issue. and frankly, it's not max i'm concerned about. 
it's zenia.'

    curnow's lips parted in unconcealed surprise. 'zenia? what's she got to do 
with it?'

    'for an intelligent man, you're often singularly unobservant - even obtuse. 
surely you realize that she's in love with max. haven't you noticed the way she 
looks, when you put your arm around him?'

    floyd had never imagined that he would see curnow looking abashed, but the 
blow seemed to have struck home.

    'zenia? i thought everyone was joking - she's such a quiet little mouse. and 
everyone's in love with max, after their fashion - even catherine the great. 
still... um, i guess i should be more careful. at least while zenia's around.'

    there was a prolonged silence while the social temperature rose back to 
normal. then, obviously to show that there was no ill feeling, curnow added in a 
conversational tone: 'you know, i've often wondered about zenia, somebody did a 
marvellous job of plastic surgery on her face, but they couldn't repair all the 
damage. the skin's too tight, and i don't think i've ever seen her laugh 
properly. maybe that's why i've avoided looking at her - would you credit me 
with so much aesthetic sensitivity, heywood?'

    the deliberately formal 'heywood' signalled good-natured needling rather 
than hostility, and floyd allowed himself to relax.

    'i can satisfy some of your curiosity - washington finally got hold of the 
facts. it seems she was in a bad air crash and was lucky to recover from her 
burns. there's no mystery, as far as we can tell, but aeroflot isn't supposed to 
have accidents.'

    'poor girl. i'm surprised they let her go into space, but i suppose she was 
the only qualified person available when irma eliminated herself. i'm sorry for 
her; apart from the injuries, the psychological shock must have been terrible.'

    'i'm sure it was; but she's obviously made a full recovery.' you're not 
telling the whole truth, said floyd to himself, and you never will. after their 
encounter on the approach to jupiter, there would always be a secret bond 
between them - not of love, but of tenderness, which is often more enduring.

    he found himself suddenly and unexpectedly grateful to curnow; the other was 
obviously surprised at his concern for zenia, but had not attempted to exploit 
it in his own defence.

    and if he had, would it have been unfair? now, days later, floyd was 
beginning to wonder if his own motives were altogether admirable. for his part, 
curnow had certainly kept his promise; indeed, if one did not know better, one 
might have imagined that he was deliberately ignoring max - at least while zenia 
was around. and he treated her with much greater kindness; indeed, there were 
occasions when he had even succeeded in making her laugh out loud.

    so the intervention had been worthwhile, whatever the impulse behind it. 
even if, as floyd sometimes ruefully suspected, it was no more than the secret 
envy that normal homo or heterosexuals feel, if completely honest with 
themselves, toward cheerfully well-adjusted polymorphs.

    his finger crept back toward the recorder, but the train of thought had been 
broken. inevitably, images of his own home and family came crowding into his 
mind, he closed his eyes, and memory recalled the climax of christopher's 
birthday party - the child blowing out the three candles on the cake, less than 
twenty-four hours ago but almost a billion kilometres away. he had played the 
video back so often that now he knew the scene by heart.

    and how often had caroline played his messages to chris, so that the boy 
would not forget his father - or view him as a stranger when he returned after 
missing yet another birthday? he was almost afraid to ask.

    yet he could not blame caroline. to him, only a few weeks would have passed 
before they met again. but she would have aged more than two years while he was 
in his dreamless sleep between the worlds. that was a long time to be a young 
widow, even a temporary one.

    i wonder if i'm coming down with one of the shipboard maladies, floyd 
thought; he had seldom felt such a sense of frustration, even of failure. i may 
have lost my family, across the gulfs of time and space, all to no purpose. for 
i have achieved nothing; even though i have reached my goal, it remains a blank, 
impenetrable wall of total darkness.

    and yet - david bowman had once cried: 'my god! it's full of stars!'



    29

    emergence



    sasha's latest edict read:



    russlish bulletin #8



    subject: tovanshch (tovarish)



    to our american guests:

    frankly, pals, i can't remember when i was last addressed by this term. to 
any twenty-first century russian, it's way back there with the battleship 
potemkin - a reminder of cloth caps and red flags and vladimir ilich haranguing 
the workers from the steps of railway carriages

    ever since i was a kid it's been bratets or druzhok- take your choice, 
you're welcome.

    comrade kovalev



    floyd was still chuckling over this notice when vasili orlov joined him as 
he floated through the lounge/observation deck on his way to the bridge.

    'what amazes me, tovarishch, is that sasha ever found time to study anything 
besides engineering physics. yet he's always quoting poems and plays i don't 
even know, and he speaks better english than - well, walter.'

    'because he switched to science, sasha is - what do you say - the black 
sheep of the family. his father was a professor of english at novosibirsk. 
russian was only allowed in the house monday to wednesday; thursday to saturday 
it was english.'

    'and sundays?'

    'oh, french or german, alternate weeks.'

    'now i know exactly what you mean by nekulturny; fits me like a glove. does 
sasha feel guilty about his... defection? and with such a background, why did he 
ever become an engineer?'

    'at novosibirsk, you soon learn who are the serfs and who are the 
aristocrats. sasha was an ambitious young man, as well as a brilliant one.'

    'just like you, vasili.'

    'et tu, brute! you see, i can quote shakespeare as well - bozhe moi! - what 
was that?'

    floyd was unlucky; he was floating with his back to the observation window, 
and saw nothing at all. when he twisted around, seconds later, there was only 
the familiar view of big brother, bisecting the giant disk of jupiter, just as 
it had done ever since their arrival.

    but to vasili, for a moment that would be imprinted on his memory forever, 
that sharp-edged outline held a completely different, and wholly impossible, 
scene. it was as if a window had suddenly been opened onto another universe.

    the vision lasted for less than a second, before his involuntary blink 
reflex cut it off. he was looking into a field not of stars, but of suns, as if 
into the crowded heart of a galaxy, or the core of a globular cluster. in that 
moment, vasili orlov lost forever the skies of earth. from now on they would 
seem intolerably empty; even mighty orion and glorious scorpio would be scarcely 
noticeable patterns of feeble sparks, not worthy of a second glance.

    when he dared to open his eyes again, it was all gone. no - not completely. 
at the very centre of the now-restored ebon rectangle, a faint star was still 
shining.

    but a star did not move as one watched. orlov blinked again, to clear his 
watering eyes. yes, the movement was real; he was not imagining it.

    a meteor? it was some indication of chief scientist vasili orlov's state of 
shock that several seconds passed before he remembered that meteors were 
impossible in airless space.

    then it blurred suddenly into a streak of light, and within a few heartbeats 
had vanished beyond the edge of jupiter. by this time, vasili had recovered his 
wits and was once more the cool, dispassionate observer.

    already he had a good estimate of the object's trajectory. there could be no 
doubt; it was aimed directly at earth.



    v

    a child of the stars



    30

    homecoming



    it was as if he had awakened from a dream - or a dream within a dream. the 
gate between the stars had brought him back to the world of men, but no longer 
as a man.

    how long had he been away? a whole lifetime... no, two lifetimes; one 
forward, one in reverse.

    as david bowman, commander and last surviving crew member of united states 
spaceship discovery, he had been caught in a gigantic trap, set three million 
years ago and triggered to respond only at the right time, and to the right 
stimulus. he had fallen through it, from one universe to another, meeting 
wonders some of which he now understood, others which he might never comprehend.

    he had raced at ever-accelerating speed, down infinite corridors of light, 
until he had outraced light itself. that, he knew, was impossible; but now he 
also knew how it could be done. as einstein had rightly said, the good lord was 
subtle, but never malicious.

    he had passed through a cosmic switching system - a grand central station of 
the galaxies - and emerged, protected from its fury by unknown forces, close to 
the surface of a giant red star.

    there he had witnessed the paradox of sunrise on the face of a sun, when the 
dying star's brilliant white dwarf companion had climbed into its sky - a 
searing apparition, drawing a tidal wave of fire beneath it. he had felt no 
fear, but only wonder, even when his space pod had carried him down into the 
inferno below... to arrive, beyond all reason, in a beautifully appointed hotel 
suite containing nothing that was not wholly familiar. however, much of it was 
fake; the books on the shelves were dummies, the cereal boxes and the cans of 
beer in the icebox - though they bore famous labels - all contained the same 
bland food with a texture like bread but a taste that was almost anything he 
cared to imagine.

    he had quickly realized that he was a specimen in a cosmic zoo, his cage 
carefully recreated from the images in old television programmes. and he 
wondered when his keepers would appear, and in what physical form.

    how foolish that expectation had been! he knew now that one might as well 
hope to see the wind, or speculate about the true shape of fire.

    then exhaustion of mind and body had overwhelmed him. for the last time, 
david bowman slept.

    it was a strange sleep, for he was not wholly unconscious. like a fog 
creeping through a forest, something invaded his mind. he sensed it only dimly, 
for the full impact would have destroyed him as swiftly and surely as the fires 
raging around him. beneath its dispassionate scrutiny, he felt neither hope nor 
fear.

    sometimes, in that long sleep, he dreamed he was awake. years had gone by; 
once he was looking in a mirror, at a wrinkled face he barely recognized as his 
own. his body was racing to its dissolution, the hands of the biological clock 
spinning madly toward a midnight they would never reach. for at the last moment, 
time came to a halt - and reversed itself.

    the springs of memory were being trapped: in controlled recollection, he was 
reliving his past, being drained of knowledge and experience as he swept back 
toward his childhood. but nothing was being lost: all that he had ever been, at 
every moment of his life, was being transferred to safer keeping. even as one 
david bowman ceased to exist, another became immortal, passing beyond the 
necessities of matter.

    he was an embryo god, not yet ready to be born. for ages he floated in 
limbo, knowing what he had been, but not what he had become. he was still in a 
state of flux -somewhere between chrysalis and butterfly. or perhaps only 
between caterpillar and chrysalis.

    and then, the stasis was broken: time re-entered his little world. the 
black, rectangular slab that suddenly appeared before him was like an old 
friend.

    he had seen it on the moon; he had encountered it in orbit around jupiter; 
and he knew, somehow, that his ancestors had met it long ago. though it held 
still unfathomed secrets, it was no longer a total mystery; some of its powers 
he now understood.

    he realized that it was not one, but multitudes; and that whatever measuring 
instruments might say, it was always the same size - as large as necessary.

    how obvious, now, was that mathematical ratio of its sides, the quadratic 
sequence 1:4:9! and how naive to have imagined that the series ended there, in 
only three dimensions!

    even as his mind focused upon these geometrical simplicities, the empty 
rectangle filled with stars. the hotel suite - if indeed it had ever really 
existed - dissolved back into the mind of its creator; and there before him was 
the luminous whirlpool of the galaxy.

    it might have been some beautiful, incredibly detailed model, embedded in a 
block of plastic. but it was the reality, now grasped by him as a whole with 
senses more subtle than vision. if he wished, he could focus his attention upon 
any one of its hundred billion stars.

    here he was, adrift in this great river of suns, halfway between the banked 
fires of the galactic core and the lonely, scattered sentinel stars of the rim. 
and there was his origin, on the far side of this chasm in the sky, this 
serpentine band of darkness, empty of all stars. he knew that this formless 
chaos, visible only by the glow that limned its edges from fire mists far 
beyond, was the still unused stuff of creation, the raw material of evolutions 
yet to be. here, time had not yet begun; not until the suns that now burned were 
long since dead would light and life reshape this void.

    unwittingly, he had crossed it once: now, far better prepared, though still 
wholly ignorant of the impulse that drove him, he must cross it again.

    the galaxy burst forth from the mental frame in which he had enclosed it: 
stars and nebulae poured past him in an illusion of infinite speed. phantom suns 
exploded and fell behind as he slipped like a shadow through their cores.

    the stars were thinning out, the glare of the milky way dimming into a pale 
ghost of the glory he had known - and might one day know again. he was back in 
the space that men called real, at the very point he had left it, seconds or 
centuries ago.

    he was vividly aware of his surroundings, and far more conscious than in 
that earlier existence of myriad sensory inputs from the external world. he 
could focus upon any one of them, and scrutinize it in virtually limitless 
detail, until he confronted the fundamental, granular structure of time and 
space, below which there was only chaos.

    and he could move, though he did not know how. but had he ever really known 
that, even when he possessed a body? the chain of command from brain to limb was 
a mystery to which he had never given any thought.

    an effort of will, and the spectrum of that nearby star shifted toward the 
blue, by precisely the amount he wished. he was falling toward it at a large 
fraction of the speed of light: though he could go faster if he desired, he was 
in no hurry. there was still much information to be processed, much to be 
considered... and much more to be won. that, he knew, was his present goal; but 
he also knew that it was only part of some far wider plan, to be revealed in due 
course.

    he gave no thought to the gateway between universes dwindling so swiftly 
behind him, or to the anxious entities gathered around it in their primitive 
spacecraft. they were part of his memories; but stronger ones were calling him 
now, calling him home to the world he had never thought to see again.

    he could hear its myriad voices, growing louder and louder - as it too was 
growing, from a star almost lost against the sun's outstretched corona, to a 
slim crescent, and finally to a glorious blue-white disk.

    they knew that he was coming. down there on that crowded globe, the alarms 
would be flashing across the radar screens, the great tracking telescopes would 
be searching the skies - and history as men had known it would be drawing to a 
close.

    he became aware that a thousand kilometres below a slumbering cargo of death 
had awakened, and was stirring in its orbit. the feeble energies it contained 
were no possible menace to him; indeed, he could profitably use them.

    he entered the maze of circuitry, and swiftly traced the way to its lethal 
core. most of the branchings could be ignored; they were blind alleys, devised 
for protection. beneath his scrutiny, their purpose was childishly simple; it 
was easy to bypass them all.

    now there was a single last barrier - a crude but effective mechanical 
relay, holding apart two contacts. until they were closed, there would be no 
power to activate the final sequence.

    he put forth his will - and, for the first time, knew failure and 
frustration. the few grams of the microswitch would not budge. he was still a 
creature of pure energy; as yet, the world of inert matter was beyond his grasp. 
well, there was a simple answer to that.

    he still had much to learn. the current pulse he induced in the relay was so 
powerful that it almost melted the coil, before it could operate the trigger 
mechanism.

    the microseconds ticked slowly by. it was interesting to observe the 
explosive lenses focus their energies, like the feeble match that ignites a 
powder train, which in turn -

    the megatons flowered in a silent detonation that brought a brief, false 
dawn to half the sleeping world. like a phoenix rising from the flames, he 
absorbed what he needed, and discarded the rest. far below, the shield of the 
atmosphere, which protected the planet from so many hazards, absorbed the most 
dangerous of the radiation. but there would be some unlucky men and animals who 
would never see again.

    in the aftermath of the explosion, it seemed as if the earth was struck 
dumb. the babble of the short and medium waves was completely silenced, 
reflected back by the suddenly enhanced ionosphere. only the microwaves still 
sliced through the invisible and slowly dissolving mirror that now surrounded 
the planet, and most of these were too tightly beamed for him to receive them. a 
few high-powered radars were still focused upon him, but that was a matter of no 
importance. he did not even bother to neutralize them as he could easily have 
done. and if any more bombs were to come his way, he would treat them with equal 
indifference. for the present, he had all the energy he needed.

    and now he was descending, in great sweeping spirals, toward the lost 
landscape of his childhood.



    31

    disneyville



    a fin-de-siecle philosopher had once remarked - and been roundly denounced 
for his pains - that walter elias disney had contributed more to genuine human 
happiness than all the religious teachers in history. now, half a century after 
the artist's death, his dreams were still proliferating across the florida 
landscape.

    when it had opened in the early 1980s, his experimental prototype community 
of tomorrow had been a showcase for new technologies and modes of living. but as 
its founder had realized, epcot would only fulfil its purpose when some of its 
vast acreage was a genuine, living town, occupied by people who called it home. 
that process had taken the remainder of the century; now the residential area 
had twenty thousand inhabitants and had, inevitably, become popularly known as 
disneyville.

    because they could move in only after penetrating a palace guard of wed 
lawyers, it was not surprising that the average age of the occupants was the 
highest in any united states community, or that its medical services were the 
most advanced in the world. some of them, indeed, could hardly have been 
conceived, still less created, in any other place.



    the apartment had been carefully designed not to look like a hospital suite, 
and only a few unusual fittings would have betrayed its purpose. the bed was 
scarcely knee-high, so that the danger of falls was minimized: it could, 
however, be raised and tilted for the convenience of the nurses. the bathroom 
tub was sunk into the floor, and had a built-in seat as well as handrails, so 
that even the elderly or infirm could get in and out of it easily. the floor was 
thickly carpeted, but there were no rugs over which one could trip, or sharp 
corners that might cause injuries. other details were less obvious - and the tv 
camera was so well concealed that no one would have suspected its presence.

    there were few personal touches - a pile of old books in one corner, and a 
framed front page of one of the last printed issues of the new york times 
proclaiming: us spaceship leaves for jupiter. close to this were two 
photographs, one showing a boy in his late teens; the other, a considerably 
older man wearing astronaut's uniform.

    though the frail, grey-haired woman watching the domestic comedy unfolding 
on the tv panel was not yet seventy, she looked much older. from time to time 
she chuckled appreciatively at some joke from the screen, but she kept glancing 
at the door as if expecting a visitor. and when she did so, she took a firmer 
grasp on the walking stick propped against her chair.

    yet she was distracted by a moment of tv drama when the door finally opened, 
and she looked around with a guilty start as the little service trolley rolled 
into the room, followed closely by a uniformed nurse.

    'time for lunch, jessie,' called the nurse: 'we've got something very nice 
for you today.'

    'don't want any lunch.'

    'it will make you feel a lot better.'

    'i won't eat until you tell me what it is.'

    'why won't you eat it?'

    'i'm not hungry. are you ever hungry?' she added slyly.

    the robot food trolley came to a halt beside the chair, and the transport 
covers opened up to reveal the dishes. throughout, the nurse never touched 
anything, not even the controls on the trolley. she now stood motionless, with a 
rather fixed smile, looking at her difficult patient.

    in the monitor room fifty metres away, the medical technician said to the 
doctor: 'now watch this.'

    jessie's gnarled hand lifted the walking stick; then, with surprising speed, 
she swept it in a short arc toward the nurse's legs.

    the nurse took no notice whatsoever, even when the stick sliced right 
through her. instead, she remarked soothingly, 'now, doesn't that look nice? eat 
it up, dear.'

    a cunning smile spread across jessie's face, but she obeyed instructions. in 
a moment, she was eating heartily.

    'you see?' said the technician. 'she knows perfectly well what's going on. 
she's a lot brighter than she pretends to be, most of the time.'

    'and she's the first?'

    'yes. all the others believe that really is nurse williams, bringing their 
meals.'

    'well, i don't think it matters. look how pleased she is, just because she's 
outsmarted us. she's eating her food, which is the purpose of the exercise. but 
we must warn the nurses - all of them, not just williams.'

    'why - oh, of course. the next time it may not be a hologram - and then 
think of the lawsuits we'll be facing from our battered staff.'



    32

    crystal spring



    the indians, and the cajun settlers who had moved here from louisiana, said 
that crystal spring was bottomless. that, of course, was nonsense, and surely 
even they could not believe it. one had only to put on a face mask and swim out 
a few strokes - and there, clearly visible, was the little cave from which the 
incredibly pure water flowed with the slender green weeds undulating around it. 
and peering up through them, the eyes of the monster.

    two dark circles, side by side - even though they never moved, what else 
could they be? that lurking presence gave an added excitement to every swim; one 
day the monster would come rushing up from its lair, scattering the fish in its 
hunt for larger prey. never would bobby or david admit that nothing more 
dangerous than an abandoned, and doubtless stolen, bicycle lay half buried among 
the water weeds, a hundred metres down.

    that depth was hard to believe, even after line and sinker had established 
it beyond argument. bobby, the older and better diver, had been perhaps a tenth 
of the way down, and had reported that the bottom looked just as far away as 
ever.

    but now the crystal spring was about to reveal its secrets; perhaps the 
legend of the confederate treasure was true, despite the scorn of all the local 
historians. at the very least, they might endear themselves to the chief of 
police - always excellent policy - by recovering a few handguns deposited after 
recent crimes.

    the little air compressor that bobby had found in the garage junk heap was 
now chugging healthily away, after their initial problems of starting it. every 
few seconds it would cough and emit a cloud of blue smoke, but it showed no sign 
of stopping. 'and even if it does,' said bobby, 'so what? if the girls in the 
underwater theatre can swim up from fifty metres without their air hoses, so can 
we. it's perfectly safe.'

    in that case, thought dave fleetingly, why didn't we tell ma what we were 
doing, and why did we wait until dad had gone back to the cape for the next 
shuttle launch? but he did not have any real qualms: bobby always knew best. it 
must be wonderful to be seventeen, and to know everything. though he wished he 
wouldn't spend quite so much time now with that stupid betty schultz. true, she 
was very pretty - but, dammit, she was a girl! it was only with the greatest 
difficulty that they had been able to get rid of her this morning.

    dave was used to being a guinea pig; that was what younger brothers were 
for. he adjusted his face mask, put on his flippers, and slid into the 
crystalline water.

    bobby handed him the air hose with the old scuba mouthpiece they had taped 
to it. dave took a breath, and grimaced.

    'it tastes horrible.'

    'you'll get used to it. in you go - no deeper than that ledge. that's where 
i'll start adjusting the pressure valve so we don't waste too much air. come up 
when i tug the hose.'

    dave slid gently beneath the surface, and into wonderland. it was a 
peaceful, monochrome world, so different from the coral reefs of the keys. there 
were none of the garish colours of the marine environment, where life - animal 
and vegetable - flaunted itself with all the hues of the rainbow. here were only 
delicate shades of blue and green, and fish that looked like fish, not like 
butterflies.

    he flippered slowly down, dragging the hose behind him, pausing to drink 
from its stream of bubbles whenever he felt the need. the sensation of freedom 
was so wonderful that he almost forgot the horrible oily taste in his mouth. 
when he reached the ledge - actually an ancient, waterlogged tree trunk, so 
overgrown with weeds that it was unrecognizable - he sat down and looked around 
him.

    he could see right across the spring, to the green slopes at the far side of 
the flooded crater, at least a hundred metres away. there were not many fish 
around, but a small school went twinkling past like a shower of silver coins in 
the sunlight streaming down from above.

    there was also an old friend stationed, as usual, at the gap where the 
waters of the spring began their journey to the sea. a small alligator ('but 
large enough,' bobby had once said cheerfully. 'he's bigger than i am.') was 
hanging vertically, without visible means of support, only his nose above the 
surface. they had never bothered him, and he had never bothered them.

    the air hose gave an impatient tug. dave was happy to go; he had not 
realized how cold it could get at that hitherto unattainable depth - and he was 
also feeling distinctly sick. but the hot sunlight soon revived his spirits.

    'no problems,' said bobby expansively. 'just keep unscrewing the valve so 
the pressure gauge doesn't drop below the red line.'

    'how deep are you going?'

    'all the way, if i feel like it.'

    dave did not take that seriously; they both knew about rapture of the depths 
and nitrogen narcosis. and in any case, the old garden hose was only thirty 
metres long. that would be plenty for this first experiment.

    as he had done so many times before, he watched with envious admiration as 
his beloved elder brother accepted a new challenge. swimming as effortlessly as 
the fish around him, bobby glided downward into that blue, mysterious universe. 
he turned once and pointed vigorously to the air hose, making it unmistakably 
clear that he needed an increased air flow.

    despite the splitting headache that had suddenly come upon him, dave 
remembered his duty. he hurried back to the ancient compressor, and opened the 
control valve to its deadly maximum - fifty parts per million of carbon 
monoxide.

    the last he saw of bobby was that confidently descending, sunlight-dappled 
figure passing forever beyond his reach. the wax statue in the funeral parlour 
was a total stranger, who had nothing to do with robert bowman.



    33

    betty



    why had he come here, returning like an unquiet ghost to the scene of 
ancient anguish? he had no idea; indeed, he had not been conscious of his 
destination, until the round eye of crystal spring had gazed up at him from the 
forest below.

    he was master of the world, yet he was paralysed by a sense of devastating 
grief he had not known for years. time had healed the wound, as it always does; 
yet it seemed only yesterday that he had stood weeping beside the emerald 
mirror, seeing only the reflections of the surrounding cypresses with their 
burden of spanish moss. what was happening to him?

    and now, still without deliberate volition, but as if swept by some gentle 
current, he was drifting northward, toward the state capital. he was looking for 
something; what it was, he would not know until he found it.

    no one, and no instrument, detected his passage. he was no longer radiating 
wastefully, but had almost mastered his control of energy, as once he had 
mastered lost though not forgotten limbs. he sank like a mist into the 
earthquakeproof vaults, until he found himself among billions of stored 
memories, and dazzling, flickering networks of electronic thoughts.

    this task was more complex than the triggering of a crude nuclear bomb, and 
took him a little longer. before he found the information he was seeking, he 
made one trivial slip, but did not bother to correct it. no one ever understood 
why, the next month, three hundred florida taxpayers, all of whose names began 
with f, received cheques for precisely one dollar. it cost many times the 
overpayment to straighten matters out, and the baffled computer engineers 
finally put the blame on a cosmic-ray shower. which, on the whole, was not so 
very far from the truth.

    in a few milliseconds, he had moved from tallahassee to 634 south magnolia 
street, tampa. it was still the same address; he need not have wasted time 
looking it up.

    but then, he had never intended to look it up, until the very moment when he 
had done so.

    after three births and two abortions, betty fernandez (n‚e schultz) was 
still a beautiful woman. at the moment she was also a very thoughtful one; she 
was watching a tv programme that brought back memories, bitter and sweet.

    it was a news special, triggered by the mysterious events of the preceding 
twelve hours, beginning with the warning that leonov had beamed back from the 
moons of jupiter. something was heading for earth; something had - harmlessly - 
detonated an orbiting nuclear bomb which no one had come forward to claim. that 
was all, but it was quite enough.

    the news commentators had dredged up all the old videotapes - and some of 
them really were tapes - going back to the once top-secret records showing the 
discovery of tma-l on the moon. for the fiftieth time, at least, she heard that 
eerie radio shriek as the monolith greeted the lunar dawn and hurled its message 
toward jupiter. and once again she watched the familiar scenes and listened to 
the old interviews aboard discovery.

    why was she watching? it was all stored somewhere in the home archives 
(though she never played it back when jos‚ was around). perhaps she was 
expecting some newsflash; she did not like to admit, even to herself, how much 
power the past still held over her emotions.

    and there was dave, as she had expected. it was an old bbc interview, of 
which she knew almost every word. he was talking about hal, trying to decide 
whether the computer was self-conscious or not.

    how young he looked - how different from those last blurred images from the 
doomed discovery! and how much like bobby as she remembered him.

    the image wavered as her eyes filled with tears. no - something was wrong 
with the set, or the channel. both sound and image were behaving erratically.

    dave's lips were moving, but she could hear nothing. then his face seemed to 
dissolve, to melt into blocks of colour. it reformed, blurred again, and then 
was steady once more. but there was still no sound.

    where had they got this picture! this was not dave as a man, but as a boy - 
as she had known him first. he was looking out of the screen almost as if he 
could see her across the gulf of years.

    he smiled; his lips moved.

    'hello, betty,' he said.

    it was not hard to form the words, and to impose them on the currents 
pulsing in the audio circuits. the real difficulty was to slow down his thoughts 
to the glacial tempo of the human brain. and then to have to wait an eternity 
for the answer.

    betty fernandez was tough; she was also intelligent, and though she had been 
a housewife for a dozen years, she had not forgotten her training as an 
electronics serviceperson. this was just another of the medium's countless 
miracles of simulation; she would accept it now, and worry about the details 
later.

    'dave,' she answered. 'dave - is that really you?'

    'i am not sure,' replied the image on the screen, in a curiously toneless 
voice. 'but i remember dave bowman, and everything about him.'

    'is he dead?'

    now that was another difficult question.

    'his body - yes. but that is no longer important. all that dave bowman 
really was, is still part of me.'

    betty crossed herself - that was a gesture she had learned from jos‚ - and 
whispered:

    'you mean - you're a spirit?'

    'i do not know a better word.'

    'why have you returned?'

    'ah! betty - why indeed! i wish you could tell me.'

    yet he knew one answer, for it was appearing on the tv screen. the divorce 
between body and mind was still far from complete, and not even the most 
complaisant of the cable networks would have transmitted the blatantly sexual 
images that were forming there now.

    betty watched for a little while, sometimes smiling, sometimes shocked. then 
she turned away, not through shame but sadness - regret for lost delights.

    'so it's not true,' she said, 'what they always told us about angels.'

    am i an angel? he wondered. but at least he understood what he was doing 
there, swept back by the tides of sorrow and desire to a rendezvous with his 
past. the most powerful emotion he had ever known had been his passion for 
betty; the elements of grief and guilt it contained only made it stronger.

    she had never told him if he was a better lover than bobby; that was one 
question he had never asked, for that would have broken the spell. they had 
clung to the same illusion, sought in each other's arms (and how young he had 
been - still only seventeen when it had started, barely two years after the 
funeral!) a balm for the same wound.

    of course, it could not last, but the experience had left him irrevocably 
changed. for more than a decade, all his autoerotic fantasies had centred upon 
betty; he had never found another woman to compare with her, and long ago had 
realized that he never would. no one else was haunted by the same beloved ghost.

    the images of desire faded from the screen; for a moment, the regular 
programme broke through, with an incongruous shot of leonov hanging above io. 
then dave bowman's face reappeared. he seemed to be losing control, for its 
lineaments were wildly unstable. sometimes he would seem only ten years old - 
then twenty or thirty -then, incredibly, a wizened mummy whose wrinkled features 
were a parody of the man she had once known.

    'i have one more question before i go. carlos - you always said he was 
jose's son, and i always wondered. what was the truth?'

    betty fernandez stared for one long, last time into the eyes of the boy she 
had once loved (he was eighteen again, and for a moment she wished she could see 
his entire body, not merely his face).

    'he was your son, david,' she whispered.

    the image faded; the normal service resumed. when, almost an hour later, 
jos‚ fernandez came quietly into the room, betty was still staring at the 
screen.

    she did not turn around as he kissed her on the back of the neck.

    'you'll never believe this, jos‚.'

    'try me.'

    'i've just lied to a ghost.'



    34

    valediction



    when the american institute of aeronautics and astronautics published its 
controversial summary fifty years of ufos in 1997, many critics pointed out that 
unidentified flying objects had been observed for centuries, and that kenneth 
arnold's 'flying saucer' sighting of 1947 had countless precedents. people had 
been seeing strange things in the sky since the dawn of history; but until the 
mid-twentieth century, ufos were a random phenomenon of no general interest. 
after that date, they became a matter of public and scientific concern, and the 
basis for what could only be called religious beliefs.

    the reason was not far to seek; the arrival of the giant rocket and the dawn 
of the space age had turned men's minds to other worlds. realization that the 
human race would soon be able to leave the planet of its birth prompted the 
inevitable questions: where's everyone, and when may we expect visitors? there 
was also the hope, though it was seldom spelled out in as many words, that 
benevolent creatures from the stars might help mankind heal its numerous self-
inflicted wounds and save it from future disasters.

    any student of psychology could have predicted that so profound a need would 
be swiftly satisfied. during the last half of the twentieth century, there were 
literally thousands of reports of spacecraft sightings from every part of the 
globe. more than that, there were hundreds of reports of 'close encounters' - 
actual meetings with extraterrestrial visitors, frequently embellished by tales 
of celestial joyrides, abductions, and even honeymoons in space. the fact that, 
over and over again, these were demonstrated to be lies or hallucinations did 
nothing to deter the faithful. men who had been shown cities on the far side of 
the moon lost little credibility even when orbiter surveys and apollo revealed 
no artifacts of any kind; ladies who married venusians were still believed when 
that planet, sadly, turned out to be hotter than molten lead.

    by the time the alaa published its report no reputable scientist - even 
among those few who had once espoused the idea- believed that ufos had any 
connection with extraterrestrial life or intelligence. of course, it would never 
be possible to prove that; any one of those myriad sightings, over the last 
thousand years, might have been the real thing. but as time went by, and 
satellite cameras and radars scanning the entire heavens produced no concrete 
evidence, the general public lost interest in the idea. the cultists, of course, 
were not discouraged, but kept the faith with their newsletters and books, most 
of them regurgitating and embellishing old reports long after they had been 
discredited or exposed.

    when the discovery of the tycho monolith - tma-i - was finally announced, 
there was a chorus of 'i told you so's!' it could no longer be denied that there 
had been visitors to the moon - and presumably to the earth as well - a little 
matter of three million years ago. at once, ufos infested the heavens again; 
though it was odd that the three independent national tracking systems, which 
could locate anything in space larger than a ballpoint pen, were still unable to 
find them.

    rather quickly, the number of reports dropped down to the 'noise level' once 
more - the figure that would be expected, merely as a result of the many 
astronomical, meteorological, and aeronautical phenomena constantly occurring in 
the skies.

    but now it had started all over again. this time, there was no mistake; it 
was official. a genuine ufo was on its way to earth.

    sightings were reported within minutes of the warning from leonov; the first 
close encounters were only a few hours later. a retired stockbroker, walking his 
bulldog on the yorkshire moors, was astonished when a disk-shaped craft landed 
beside him and the occupant - quite human, except for the pointed ears - asked 
the way to downing street. the contactee was so surprised that he was only able 
to wave his stick in the general direction of whitehall; conclusive proof of the 
meeting was provided by the fact that the bulldog now refused to take his food.

    although the stockbroker had no previous history of mental illness, even 
those who believed him had some difficulty in accepting the next report. this 
time it was a basque shepherd on a traditional mission; he was greatly relieved 
when what he had feared to be border guards turned out to be a couple of cloaked 
men with piercing eyes, who wanted to know the way to the united nations 
headquarters.

    they spoke perfect basque - an excruciatingly difficult tongue with no 
affinity to any other known language of mankind. clearly, the space visitors 
were remarkable linguists, even if their geography was oddly deficient.

    so it went on, case after case. very few of the contactees were actually 
lying or insane; most of them sincerely believed their own stories, and retained 
that belief even under hypnosis. and some were just victims of practical jokes 
or improbable accidents - like the unlucky amateur archaeologists who found the 
props that a celebrated science-fiction moviemaker had abandoned in the tunisian 
desert almost four decades earlier.



    yet only at the beginning - and at the very end - was any human being 
genuinely aware of his presence; and that was because he so desired it.

    the world was his to explore and examine as he pleased, without restraint or 
hindrance. no walls could keep him out, no secrets could be hidden from the 
senses he possessed. at first he believed that he was merely fulfilling old 
ambitions, by visiting the places he had never seen in that earlier existence. 
not until much later did he realize that his lightning-like sallies across the 
face of the globe had a deeper purpose.

    in some subtle way, he was being used as a probe, sampling every aspect of 
human affairs. the control was so tenuous that he was barely conscious of it; he 
was rather like a hunting dog on a leash, allowed to make excursions of his own, 
yet nevertheless compelled to obey the overriding wishes of his master.

    the pyramids, the grand canyon, the moon-washed snows of everest - these 
were choices of his own. so were some art galleries and concert halls; though he 
would certainly, on his own initiative, never have endured the whole of the 
ring.

    nor would he have visited so many factories, prisons, hospitals, a nasty 
little war in asia, a racecourse, a complicated orgy in beverly hills, the oval 
room of the white house, the kremlin archives, the vatican library, the sacred 
black stone of the kaabah at mecca.

    there were also experiences of which he had no clear memory, as if they had 
been censored - or he was being protected from them by some guardian angel. for 
example -what was he doing at the leakey memorial museum, in olduvai gorge? he 
had no greater interest in the origin of man than any other intelligent member 
of the species h. sapiens, and fossils meant nothing to him. yet the famous 
skulls, guarded like crown jewels in their display cases, aroused strange echoes 
in his memory, and an excitement for which he was unable to account. there was a 
feeling of d‚ja vu stronger than any he had ever known; the place should be 
familiar - but something was wrong. it was like a house to which one returns 
after many years, to find that all the furniture has been changed, the walls 
moved, and even the stairways rebuilt.

    it was bleak, hostile terrain, dry and parched. where were the lush plains 
and the myriad fleet-footed herbivores that had roamed across them, three 
million years ago?

    three million years. how had he known that?

    no answer came from the echoing silence into which he had thrown the 
question. but then he saw, once more looming before him, a familiar black 
rectangular shape. he approached, and a shadowy image appeared in its depths, 
like a reflection in a pool of ink.

    the sad and puzzled eyes that stared back from beneath that hairy, receding 
forehead looked beyond him into a future they could never see. for he was that 
future, a hundred thousand generations further down the stream of time.

    history had begun there; that at least he now understood. but how - and 
above all, why - were secrets still withheld from him?

    but there was one last duty, and that was hardest of all. he was still 
sufficiently human to put it off until the very end.



    now what's she up to? the duty nurse asked herself, zooming the tv monitor 
onto the old lady. she's tried lots of tricks, but this is the first time i've 
seen her talking to her hearing aid, for goodness sake. i wonder what she's 
saying?

    the microphone was not sensitive enough to pick up the words, but that 
scarcely seemed to matter. jessie bowman had seldom looked so peaceful and 
content. though her eyes were closed, her entire face was wreathed in an almost 
angelic smile while her lips continued to form whispered words.

    and then the watcher saw something that she tried hard to forget because to 
report it would instantly disqualify her in the nursing profession. slowly and 
jerkily, the comb lying on the bedside table raised itself in the air as if 
lifted by clumsy, invisible fingers.

    on the first attempt, it missed; then, with obvious difficulty, it began to 
part the long silver strands, pausing sometimes to disentangle a knot.

    jessie bowman was not speaking now, but she continued to smile. the comb was 
moving with more assurance, and no longer in abrupt, uncertain jerks.

    how long it lasted the nurse could never be certain. not until the comb was 
gently replaced on the table did she recover from her paralysis.

    ten-year-old dave bowman had finished the chore which he always hated but 
which his mother loved. and a david bowman who was now ageless had gained his 
first control of obdurate matter.

    jessie bowman was still smiling when the nurse finally came to investigate. 
she had been too scared to hurry; but it would have made no difference anyway.



    35

    rehabilitation



    the uproar of earth was comfortably muted, across the millions of kilometres 
of space. leonov's crew watched, with fascination yet with a certain detachment, 
the debates in the united nations, the interviews with distinguished 
scientists', the theorizing of the news commentators, the matter-of-fact yet 
wildly conflicting accounts of the ufo contactees. they could contribute nothing 
to the brouhaha, for they had witnessed no further manifestations of any kind. 
zagadka, alias big brother, remained as blankly indifferent to their presence as 
ever. and that was indeed an ironic situation; they had come all the way from 
earth to solve a mystery - and it looked as if the answer might be right back at 
their starting point.

    for the first time, they felt grateful for the slow velocity of light, and 
the two-hour delay that made live interviews impossible on the earth-jupiter 
circuit. even so, floyd was badgered by so many media requests that he finally 
went on strike. nothing more remained to be said, and he had said it at least a 
dozen times.

    besides, there was still much work to be done. leonov had to be prepared for 
the long journey home, so that it would be ready to depart immediately when the 
launch window opened. the timing was not at all critical; even if they missed by 
a month, that would merely prolong the trip. chandra, curnow, and floyd would 
not even notice as they slept their way toward the sun; but the rest of the crew 
was grimly determined to leave just as soon as the laws of celestial mechanics 
permitted.

    discovery still posed many problems. the ship had barely sufficient 
propellant for the return to earth, even if it left much later than leonov and 
flew a minimum-energy orbit - which would take almost three years. and this 
would be possible only if hal could be reliably programmed to carry out the 
mission with no human intervention except long-range monitoring. without his 
cooperation, discovery would have to be abandoned once again.

    it had been fascinating - indeed, deeply moving - to watch the steady 
regrowth of hal's personality, from brain-damaged child to puzzled adolescent 
and at length to slightly condescending adult. although he knew that such 
anthropomorphic labels were highly misleading, floyd found it quite impossible 
to avoid them.

    and there were times when he felt that the whole situation had a haunting 
familiarity. how often he had seen videodramas in which disturbed youngsters 
were straightened out by all-wise descendants of the legendary sigmund freud! 
essentially the same story was being played out in the shadow of jupiter.

    the electronic psychoanalysis had proceeded at a speed totally beyond human 
comprehension as repair and diagnostic programs flashed through hal's circuits 
at billions of bits a second, pinpointing possible malfunctions and correcting 
them. though most of these programs had been tested in advance on hal's twin, 
sal 9000, the impossibility of a real-time dialogue between the two computers 
was a serious handicap. sometimes hours were wasted when it proved necessary to 
check back with earth at a critical point in the therapy.

    for despite all chandra's work, the computer's rehabilitation was still far 
from complete. hal exhibited numerous idiosyncrasies and nervous tics, sometimes 
even ignoring spoken words - though he would always acknowledge keyboard inputs 
from anyone. in the reverse direction, his outputs were even more eccentric.

    there were times when he would give verbal replies, but would not display 
them visually. at other times he would do both - but refused to print hard copy. 
he would give no excuses or explanations - not even the stubbornly impenetrable 
'i prefer not to' of melville's autistic scrivener, bartelby.

    however, he was not actively disobedient so much as reluctant, and only 
where certain tasks were concerned. it was always possible to win his 
cooperation eventually - 'to talk him out of his sulk', as curnow put it neatly.

    it was not surprising that dr chandra was beginning to show the strain. on 
one celebrated occasion when max brailovsky innocently revived an old canard, he 
almost lost his temper.

    'is it true, dr chandra, that you chose the name hal to be one step ahead of 
ibm?'

    'utter nonsense! half of us come from ibm and we've been trying to stamp out 
that story for years. i thought that by now every intelligent person knew that 
h-a-l is derived from heuristic algorithmic.'

    afterward, max swore that he could distinctly hear the capital letters. 

    in floyd's private opinion, the odds were at least fifty to one against 
flying discovery safely back to earth. and then chandra came to him with an 
extraordinary proposal.

    'dr floyd, can i have a word with you?'

    after all the weeks and shared experiences, chandra was still as formal as 
ever - not only to floyd, but to all the crew. he would not even address the 
ship's baby, zenia, without the prefix 'ma'am'.

    'of course, chandra. what is it?'

    'i've virtually completed the programming for the six most probable 
variations on the hohmann return orbit. five have now been run on a simulation, 
without any problems.'

    'excellent. i'm sure that no one else on earth - in the solar system - could 
have done it.'

    'thank you. however, you know as well as i do that it's impossible to 
program for every eventuality. hal may - will - function perfectly, and will be 
able to handle any reasonable emergency. but all sorts of trivial accidents - 
minor equipment failures that could be fixed with a screwdriver, broken wires, 
stuck switches - could leave him helpless and abort the whole mission.'

    'you're absolutely right, of course, and it's been worrying me. but what can 
we do about it?'

    'it's really quite simple. i'd like to stay with discovery.'

     floyd's immediate reaction was that chandra had gone crazy. on second 
thoughts, perhaps he was only half crazy. it might indeed make all the 
difference between success and failure to have a human being - that superb all-
purpose trouble-shooting and repair device - aboard discovery for the long 
voyage back to earth. but the objections were completely overwhelming.

    'it's an interesting idea,' floyd answered with extreme caution, 'and i 
certainly appreciate your enthusiasm. but have you thought of all the problems?' 
that was a silly thing to say; chandra would have all the answers already filed 
away for immediate retrieval.

    'you'll be on your own for over three years! suppose you had an accident or 
a medical emergency?'

    'that's a risk i'm prepared to take.'

    'and what about food, water? leonov doesn't have enough to spare.'

    'i've checked discovery's recycling system; it can be made operational again 
without too much difficulty. besides, we indians can manage on very little.'

    it was unusual for chandra to refer to his origins, or indeed to make any 
personal statements; his 'true confession' was the only example floyd could 
remember. but he did not doubt the claim; curnow had once remarked that dr 
chandra had the sort of physique that could only be achieved by centuries of 
starvation. although it sounded like one of the engineer's unkinder wisecracks, 
it had been made entirely without malice - indeed, with sympathy; though not, of 
course, in chandra's hearing.

    'well, we still have several weeks to decide. i'll think it over and talk to 
washington.'

    'thank you; do you mind if i start making the arrangements?'

    'er - not at all, as long as they don't interfere with the existing plans. 
remember - mission control will have to make the final decision.'

    and i know exactly what mission control will say. it was madness to expect a 
man to survive in space for three, years, alone.

    but, of course, chandra had always been alone.



    36

    fire in the deep



    earth was already far behind, and the awesome wonders of the jovian system 
were expanding swiftly before him, when he had his revelation.

    how could he have been so blind - so stupid! it was as if he had been 
walking in his sleep; now he was starting to awaken.

    who are you? he cried. what do you want? why have you done this to me?

    there was no answer, yet he was certain that he had been heard. he sensed 
a... presence, even as a man can tell, though his eyes are tightly shut, that he 
is in a closed room and not some empty, open space. around him there was the 
faint echo of a vast mentality, an implacable will.

    he called again into the reverberant silence, and again there was no direct 
reply - only that sense of watchful companionship. very well; he would find the 
answers for himself.

    some were obvious; whoever or whatever they were, they were interested in 
mankind. they had tapped and stored his memories, for their own inscrutable 
purposes. and now they had done the same with his deepest emotions, sometimes 
with his cooperation, sometimes without.

    he did not resent that; indeed, the very processing he had experienced made 
such childish reactions impossible. he was beyond love and hate and desire and 
fear - but he had not forgotten them, and could still understand how they ruled 
the world of which he had once been part. was that the purpose of the exercise? 
if so, for what ultimate goal?

    he had become a player in a game of gods, and must learn the rules as he 
went along.



    the jagged rocks of the four tiny outer moons, sinope, pasiphae, carme, and 
ananke, flickered briefly across his field of consciousness; then came elara, 
lysithea, himalia, and leda at half their distance from jupiter. he ignored them 
all; now the pock-marked face of callisto lay ahead.

    once, twice, he orbited the battered globe, larger than earth's own moon, 
while senses of which he had been unaware probed its outer layers of ice and 
dust. his curiosity was quickly satisfied; the world was a frozen fossil, still 
bearing the marks of collisions that, aeons ago, must have come close to 
shattering it. one hemisphere was a giant bull's-eye, a series of concentric 
rings where solid rock had once flowed in kilometre-high ripples under some 
ancient hammer blow from space.

    seconds later, he was circling ganymede. now there was a far more complex 
and interesting world; though so near to callisto, and almost the same size, it 
presented an utterly different appearance. there were, it was true, numerous 
craters - but most of them seemed to have been, quite literally, ploughed back 
into the ground. the most extraordinary feature of the ganymedean landscape was 
the presence of meandering stripes, built up from scores of parallel furrows a 
few kilometres apart. this grooved terrain looked as if it had been produced by 
armies of intoxicated ploughmen, weaving back and forth across the face of the 
satellite.

    in a few revolutions, he saw more of ganymede than all the space probes ever 
sent from earth, and filed away the knowledge for future use. one day it would 
be important; he was sure of that, though he did not know why - any more than he 
understood the impulse that was now driving him so purposefully from world to 
world.

    as, presently, it brought him to europa. though he was still largely a 
passive spectator, he was aware now of a rising interest, a focusing of 
attention - a concentration of will. even if he was a puppet in the hands of an 
unseen and uncommunicative master, some of the thoughts of that controlling 
influence leaked - or were allowed to leak - into his own mind.

    the smooth, intricately patterned globe now, rushing toward him bore little 
resemblance either to ganymede or callisto. it looked organic; the network of 
lines branching and intersecting over its entire surface was uncannily like a 
world-spanning system of veins and arteries.

    the endless ice fields of a frigid waste, far colder than the antarctic, 
stretched beneath him. then, with brief surprise, he saw that he was passing 
over the wreckage of a spaceship. he recognized it instantly as the ill-fated 
tsien, featured in so many of the video newscasts he had analysed. not now - not 
now - there would be ample opportunity later.

    then he was through the ice, and into a world as unknown to his controllers 
as to himself.

    it was an ocean world, its hidden waters protected from the vacuum of space 
by a crust of ice. in most places the ice was kilometres thick, but there were 
lines of weakness where it had cracked open and torn apart. then there had been 
a brief battle between two implacably hostile elements that came into direct 
contact on no other world in the solar system. the war between sea and space 
always ended in the same stalemate; the exposed water simultaneously boiled and 
froze, repairing the armour of ice.

    the seas of europa would have frozen completely solid long ago without the 
influence of nearby jupiter. its gravity continually kneaded the core of the 
little world; the forces that convulsed io were working there, though with much 
less ferocity. as he skimmed across the face of the deep, he saw everywhere the 
evidence of that tug-of-war between planet and satellite.

    and he both heard and felt it, in the continual roar and thunder of 
submarine earthquakes, the hiss of escaping gases from the interior, the 
infrasonic pressure waves of avalanches sweeping over the abyssal plains. by 
comparison with the tumultuous ocean that covered europa, even the noisy seas of 
earth were silent.

    he had not lost his sense of wonder, and the first oasis filled him with 
delighted surprise. it extended for almost a kilometre around a tangled mass of 
pipes and chimneys deposited by mineral brines gushing from the interior. out of 
that natural parody of a gothic castle, black, scalding liquids pulsed in a slow 
rhythm, as if driven by the beating of some mighty heart. and, like blood, they 
were the authentic sign of life itself.

    the boiling fluids drove back the deadly cold leaking down from above, and 
formed an island of warmth on the seabed. equally important, they brought from 
europa's interior all the chemicals of life. there, in an environment where none 
had expected it, were energy and food, in abundance.

    yet it should have been expected; he remembered that, only a lifetime ago, 
such fertile oases had been discovered in the deep oceans of earth. here they 
were present on an immensely larger scale, and in far greater variety.

    in the tropical zone close to the contorted walls of the 'castle' were 
delicate, spidery structures that seemed to be the analogy of plants, though 
almost all were capable of movement. crawling among these were bizarre slugs and 
worms, some feeding on the plants, others obtaining their food directly from the 
mineral-laden waters around them. at greater distances from the source of heat - 
the submarine fire around which all the creatures warmed themselves - were 
sturdier, more robust organisms, not unlike crabs or spiders.

    armies of biologists could have spent lifetimes studying that one small 
oasis. unlike the palaeozoic terrestrial seas, it was not a stable environment, 
so evolution had progressed swiftly here, producing multitudes of fantastic 
forms. and they were all under indefinite stay of execution; sooner or later, 
each fountain of life would weaken and die, as the forces that powered it moved 
their focus elsewhere.

    again and again, in his wanderings across the europan seabed, he encountered 
the evidence of such tragedies. countless circular areas were littered with the 
skeletons and mineral-encrusted remains of dead creatures, where entire chapters 
of evolution had been deleted from the book of life.

    he saw huge, empty shells formed like convoluted trumpets as large as a man. 
there were clams of many shapes - bivalves, and even trivalves. and there were 
spiral stone patterns, many metres across, which seemed an exact analogy of the 
beautiful ammonites that disappeared so mysteriously from earth's oceans at the 
end of the cretaceous period.

    searching, seeking, he moved back and forth over the face of the abyss. 
perhaps the greatest of all the wonders he met was a river of incandescent lava, 
flowing for a hundred kilometres along a sunken valley. the pressure at that 
depth was so great that the water in contact with the red-hot magma could not 
flash into steam, and the two liquids coexisted in an uneasy truce.

    there, on another world and with alien actors, something like the story of 
egypt had been played long before the coming of man. as the nile had brought 
life to a narrow ribbon of desert, so this river of warmth had vivified the 
europan deep. along its banks, in a band never more than two kilometres wide, 
species after species had evolved and flourished and passed away. and at least 
one had left a monument behind it.

    at first, he thought that it was merely another of the encrustations of 
mineral salts that surrounded almost all the thermal vents. however, as he came 
closer, he saw that it was not a natural formation, but a structure created by 
intelligence. or perhaps by instinct; on earth, the termites reared castles that 
were almost equally imposing, and the web of a spider was more exquisitely 
designed.

    the creatures that had lived there must have been quite small, for the 
single entrance was only half a metre wide. that entrance - a thick-walled 
tunnel, made by heaping rocks on top of each other - gave a clue to the 
builders' intentions. they had reared a fortress, there in the flickering glow 
not far from the banks of their molten nile. and then they had vanished.

    they could not have left more than a few centuries before. the walls of the 
fortress, built from irregularly shaped rocks that must have been collected with 
great labour, were covered with only a thin crust of mineral deposits. one piece 
of evidence suggested why the stronghold had been abandoned. part of the roof 
had fallen in, perhaps owing to the continual earthquakes; and in an underwater 
environment, a fort without a roof was wide open to an enemy.

    he encountered no other sign of intelligence along the river of lava. once, 
however, he saw something uncannily like a crawling man - except that it had no 
eyes and no nostrils, only a huge, toothless mouth that gulped continuously, 
absorbing nourishment from the liquid medium around it.

    along the narrow band of fertility in the deserts of the deep, whole 
cultures and even civilizations might have risen and fallen, armies might have 
marched (or swum) under the command of europan tamberlanes or napoleons. and the 
rest of their world would never have known, for all those oases of warmth were 
as isolated from one another as the planets themselves. the creatures who basked 
in the glow of the lava river, and fed around the hot vents, could not cross the 
hostile wilderness between their lonely islands, if they had ever produced 
historians and philosophers, each culture would have been convinced that it was 
alone in the universe.

    yet even the space between the oases was not altogether empty of life; there 
were hardier creatures who had dared its rigours. often swimming overhead were 
the europan analogues of fish - streamlined torpedoes, propelled by vertical 
tails, steered by fins along their bodies. the resemblance to the most 
successful dwellers in earth's oceans was inevitable; given the same engineering 
problems, evolution must produce very similar answers. as witness the dolphin 
and the shark - superficially almost identical, yet from far distant branches of 
the tree of life.

    there was, however, one very obvious difference between the fish of the 
europan seas and those in terrestrial oceans; they had no gills, for there was 
hardly a trace of oxygen to be extracted from the waters in which they swam. 
like the creatures around earth's own geothermal vents, their metabolism was 
based on sulphur compounds, present in abundance in the near-volcanic 
environment.

    and very few had eyes. apart from the flickering glow of the rare lava 
outpourings, and occasional bursts of bioluminescence from creatures seeking 
mates, or hunters questing prey, it was a lightless world.

    it was also a doomed one. not only were its energy sources sporadic and 
constantly shifting, but the tidal forces that drove them were steadily 
weakening. even if they developed true intelligence, the europans must perish 
with the final freezing of their world.

    they were trapped between fire and ice.



    37

    estrangement



    'i'm truly sorry, old friend, to be the bearer of such bad news, but 
caroline has asked me, and you know how i feel about you both.

    'and i don't think it can be such a surprise. some of the remarks you've 
made to me over the last year have hinted at it... and you know how bitter she 
was when you left earth.

    'no, i don't believe there's anyone else. if there was, she'd have told 
me... but sooner or later - well, she's an attractive young woman.

    'chris is fine, and of course he doesn't know what's happening. at least he 
won't be hurt. he's too young to understand, and children are incredibly... 
elastic? - just a minute, i'll have to key my thesaurus... ah, resilient.

    'now to things that may seem less important to you. everyone is still trying 
to explain that bomb detonation as an accident, but of course nobody believes 
it. because nothing else has happened, the general hysteria has died down; we're 
left with what one of your commentators has called the "looking-over-the-
shoulder syndrome".

    'and someone has found a hundred-year-old poem that sums up the situation so 
neatly that everybody's quoting it. it's set in the last days of the roman 
empire, at the gates of a city whose occupants are waiting for invaders to 
arrive. the emperor and dignitaries are all lined up in their most costly togas, 
ready with speeches of welcome. the senate has closed, because any laws it 
passes today will be ignored by the new masters.

    'then, suddenly, a dreadful piece of news arrives from the frontier. there 
aren't any invaders. the reception committee breaks up in confusion; everyone 
goes home muttering disappointedly, "now what will happen to us? those people 
were a kind of solution."

    'there's just one slight change needed to bring the poem up to date. it's 
called "waiting for the barbarians" - and this time, we are the barbarians. and 
we don't know what we're waiting for, but it certainly hasn't arrived.

    'one other item. had you heard that commander bowman's mother died only a 
few days after the thing came to earth? it does seem an odd coincidence, but the 
people at her nursing home say that she never showed the slightest interest in 
the news, so it couldn't possibly have affected her.'



    floyd switched off the recording. dimitri was right; he was not taken by 
surprise. but that made not the slightest difference; it hurt just as badly.

    yet what else could he have done? if he had refused to go on the mission - 
as caroline had so clearly hoped - he would have felt guilty and unfulfilled for 
the remainder of his life. that would have poisoned his marriage; better this 
clean break, when physical distance softened the pain of separation. (or did it? 
in some ways, it made things worse.) more important was duty, and the sense of 
being part of a team devoted to a single goal.

    so jessie bowman was gone. perhaps that was another cause for guilt. he had 
helped to steal her only remaining son, and that must have contributed to her 
mental breakdown. inevitably, he was reminded of a discussion that walter curnow 
had started, on that very subject.

    'why did you choose dave bowman? he always struck me as a cold fish - not 
actually unfriendly, but whenever he came into the room, the temperature seemed 
to drop ten degrees.'

    'that was one of the reasons we did select him. he had no close family ties, 
except for a mother he didn't see very often. so he was the sort of man we could 
send on a long, open-ended mission.'

    'how did he get that way?'

    'i suppose the psychologists could tell you. i did see his report, of 
course, but that was a long time ago. there was something about a brother who 
was killed - and his father died soon afterward, in an accident on one of the 
early shuttles. i'm not supposed to tell you this, but it certainly doesn't 
matter now.'

    it didn't matter; but it was interesting. now floyd almost envied david 
bowman, who had come to that very spot a free man unencumbered by emotional ties 
with earth.

    no - he was deceiving himself. even while the pain gripped his heart like a 
vice, what he felt for david bowman was not envy, but pity.



    38

    foamscape



    the last beast he saw, before he left the oceans of europa, was much the 
largest. it closely resembled one of the banyan trees from earth's tropics, 
whose scores of trunks allow a single plant to create a small forest sometimes 
covering hundreds of square metres. the specimen, however, was walking, 
apparently on a trek between oases. if it was not one of the creatures that had 
destroyed tsien, it certainly belonged to a very similar species.

    now he had learned all that he needed to know - or, rather, all that they 
needed to know. there was one more moon to visit; seconds later, the burning 
landscape of io lay below him.

    it was as he had expected. energy and food were there in abundance, but the 
time was not yet ripe for their union. around some of the cooler sulphur lakes, 
the first steps had been taken on the road to life, but before any degree of 
organization had occurred, all such bravely premature attempts were thrown back 
into the melting pot. not until the tidal forces that drove io's furnaces had 
lost their power, millions of years later, would there be anything to interest 
biologists on that seared and sterilized world.

    he wasted little time on io, and none at all on the tiny inner moons that 
skirted jupiter's ghostly rings - themselves only pale shadows of the glory that 
was saturn's. the greatest of worlds lay before him; he would know it as no man 
had ever done, or ever would.

    the million-kilometre-long tendrils of magnetic force, the sudden explosions 
of radio waves, the geysers of electrified plasma wider than the planet earth- 
they were as real and clearly visible to him as the clouds banding the planet in 
multihued glory. he could understand the complex pattern of their interactions, 
and realized that jupiter was much more wonderful than anyone had ever guessed.

    even as he fell through the roaring heart of the great red spot, with the 
lightning of its continent-wide thunderstorms detonating around him, he knew why 
it had persisted for centuries though it was made of gases far less substantial 
than those that formed the hurricanes of earth. the thin scream of hydrogen wind 
faded as he sank into the calmer depths, and a sleet of waxen snowflakes - some 
already coalescing into barely palpable mountains of hydrocarbon foam - 
descended from the heights above. it was already warm enough for liquid water to 
exist, but there were no oceans there; that purely gaseous environment was too 
tenuous to support them.

    he descended through layer after layer of cloud, until he entered a region 
of such clarity that even human vision could have scanned an area more than a 
thousand kilometres across. it was only a minor eddy in the vaster gyre of the 
great red spot; and it held a secret that men had long guessed, but never 
proved.

    skirting the foothills of the drifting foam mountains were myriads of small, 
sharply-defined clouds, all about the same size and patterned with similar red 
and brown mottlings. they were small only as compared with the inhuman scale of 
their surroundings; the very least would have covered a fair-sized city.

    they were clearly alive, for they were moving with slow deliberation along 
the flanks of the aerial mountains, browsing off their slopes like colossal 
sheep. and they were calling to each other in the metre band, their radio voices 
faint but clear against the cracklings and concussions of jupiter itself.

    nothing less than living gasbags, they floated in the narrow zone between 
freezing heights and scorching depths. narrow, yes - but a domain far larger 
than all the biosphere of earth.

    they were not alone. moving swiftly among them were other creatures so small 
that they could easily have been overlooked. some of them bore an almost uncanny 
resemblance to terrestrial aircraft and were of about the same size. but they 
too were alive - perhaps predators, perhaps parasites, perhaps even herdsmen.

    a whole new chapter of evolution, as alien as that which he had glimpsed on 
europa, was opening before him. there were jet-propelled torpedoes like the 
squids of the terrestrial oceans, hunting and devouring the huge gasbags. but 
the balloons were not defenceless; some of them fought backs with electric 
thunderbolts and with clawed tentacles like kilometre-long chainsaws.

    there were even stranger shapes, exploiting almost every possibility of 
geometry - bizarre, translucent kites, tetrahedra, spheres, polyhedra, tangles 
of twisted ribbons.

    the gigantic plankton of the jovian atmosphere, they were designed to float 
like gossamer in the uprising currents, until they had lived long enough to 
reproduce; then they would be swept down into the depths to be carbonized and 
recycled in a new generation.

    he was searching a world more than a hundred times the area of earth, and 
though he saw many wonders, nothing there hinted of intelligence. the radio 
voices of the great balloons carried only simple messages of warning or of fear. 
even the hunters, who might have been expected to develop higher degrees of 
organization, were like the sharks in earth's oceans - mindless automata.

    and for all its breathtaking size and novelty, the biosphere of jupiter was 
a fragile world, a place of mists and foam, of delicate silken threads and 
paper-thin tissues spun from the continual snowfall of petrochemicals formed by 
lightning in the upper atmosphere. few of its constructs were more substantial 
than soap bubbles; its most terrifying predators could be torn to shreds by even 
the feeblest of terrestrial carnivores.

    like europa on a vastly grander scale, jupiter was an evolutionary cul-de-
sac. consciousness would never emerge here; even if it did, it would be doomed 
to a stunted existence. a purely aerial culture might develop, but in an 
environment where fire was impossible, and solids scarcely existed, it could 
never even reach the stone age.

    and now, as he hovered above the centre of a jovian cyclone merely as large 
as africa, he became aware once again of the presence controlling him. moods and 
emotions were leaking into his own consciousness, though he could not identify 
any specific concepts or ideas. it was as if he were listening, outside a closed 
door, to a debate in progress, and in a language he could not understand. but 
the muffled sounds clearly conveyed disappointment, then uncertainty, then a 
sudden determination - though for what purpose he could not tell. once again, he 
felt like a pet dog, able to share his master's changing moods but not to 
comprehend them.

    and then the invisible leash was taking him down toward the heart of 
jupiter. he was sinking through the clouds, below the level where any form of 
life was possible.

    soon he was beyond the reach of the last rays from the faint and distant 
sun. the pressure and temperature were swiftly mounting; already it was above 
the boiling point of water, and he passed briefly through a layer of superheated 
steam. jupiter was like an onion; he was peeling it away skin by skin, though as 
yet he had travelled only a fraction of the distance to its core.

    beneath the steam was a witches' brew of petrochemicals - enough to power 
for a million years all the internal-combustion engines that mankind had dyer 
built. it became thicker and denser; then, quite abruptly, it ended at a 
discontinuity only a few kilometres thick.

    heavier than any rocks on earth, yet still a liquid, the next shell 
consisted of silicon and carbon compounds of a complexity that could have 
provided lifetimes of work for terrestrial chemists. layer followed layer for 
thousands of kilometres, but as the temperature rose into the hundreds and then 
the thousands of degrees, the composition of the various strata became simpler 
and simpler. halfway down to the core, it was too hot for chemistry; all 
compounds were torn apart, and only the basic elements could exist.

    next there came a deep sea of hydrogen - but not hydrogen as it had ever 
existed for more than a fraction of a second in any laboratory on earth. this 
hydrogen was under such enormous pressure that it had become a metal.

    he had almost reached the centre of the planet, but jupiter had one more 
surprise in store. the thick shell of metallic yet still fluid hydrogen ended 
abruptly. at last, there was a solid surface, sixty thousand kilometres down.

    for ages, the carbon baked out of the chemical reactions far above had been 
drifting down toward the centre of the planet. there it had gathered, 
crystallizing at a pressure of millions of atmospheres. and there, by one of 
nature's supreme jests, was something very precious to mankind.

    the core of jupiter, forever beyond human reach, was a diamond as big as the 
earth.



    39

    in the pod bay



    'walter - i'm worried about heywood.'

    'i know, tanya - but what can we do?'

    curnow had never seen commander orlova in so indecisive a mood; it made her 
seem much more appealing, despite his prejudice against small women.

    'i'm very fond of him, but that's not the reason. his - i suppose gloom is 
the best word for it - is making everyone miserable. leonov has been a happy 
ship. i want to keep it that way.'

    'why don't you talk to him? he respects you, and i'm sure he'll do his best 
to snap out of it.'

    'i intend to do just that. and if it doesn't work -' 'well?'

    'there's one simple solution. what more can he do on this trip? when we 
start back for home, he'll be in hibernation anyway. we could always - what do 
you say, jump the gun on him.'

    'phew - the same dirty trick that katerina played on me. he'd be mad when he 
woke up.'

    'but also safely back on earth, and very busy. i'm sure he'd forgive us.'

    'i don't think you're serious. even if i backed you up, washington would 
raise hell. besides, suppose something happened, and we really need him badly? 
isn't there a two-week buffer period, before you can revive anyone safely?'

    'at heywood's age, more like a month. yes, we'd be committed. but what do 
you think could happen now? he's done the job he was sent for - apart from 
keeping an eye on us. and i'm sure you've been well briefed about that in some 
obscure suburb of virginia or maryland.'

    'i neither confirm nor deny. and frankly, i'm a lousy undercover agent. i 
talk too much, and i hate security. i've fought all my life to keep my rating 
below restricted. every time there was danger of being reclassified confidential 
or, worse still, secret, i'd go and create a scandal. though that's getting very 
difficult nowadays.'

    'walter, you're incorrupt -'

    'incorrigible?'

    'yes, that's the word i meant. but back to heywood, please. would you like 
to talk to him first?'

    'you mean - give him a pep talk? i'd rather help katerina drive in the 
needle. our psychologies are too different. he thinks i'm a loudmouthed clown.'

    'which you often are. but that's only to hide your real feelings. some of us 
have evolved the theory that deep down inside you is a really nice person, 
struggling to get out.'

    for once, curnow was at a loss for words. finally he mumbled: 'oh, very well 
- i'll do my best. but don't expect miracles; my profile gave me z for tact. 
where's he hiding at the moment?'

    'in the pod bay. he claims he's working on his final report, but i don't 
believe it. he just wants to get away from us all, and that's the quietest 
place.'

    that was not the reason, though it was indeed an important one. unlike the 
carousel, where most of the action aboard discovery was then taking place, the 
pod bay was a zero-gee environment.

    right at the beginning of the space age, men had discovered the euphoria of 
weightlessness and remembered the freedom they had lost when they left the 
ancient womb of the sea. beyond gravity, some of that freedom was regained; with 
the loss of weight went many of the cares and worries of earth.

    heywood floyd had not forgotten his sorrow, but it was more bearable there. 
when he was able to look at the matter dispassionately, he was surprised at the 
strength of his reaction to an event not wholly unexpected. more than loss of 
love was involved, though that was the worst part. the blow had come when he was 
particularly vulnerable, at the very moment when he was feeling a sense of 
anticlimax, even futility.

    and he knew precisely why. he had achieved all that he had been expected to 
do, thanks to the skill and cooperation of his colleagues (he was letting them 
down, he knew, by his present selfishness). if all went well - that litany of 
the space age! - they would return to earth with a cargo of knowledge that no 
expedition had ever gathered before, and a few years later even the once-lost 
discovery would be restored to her builders.

    it was not enough. the overpowering enigma of big brother remained out 
there, only a few kilometres away, mocking all human aspirations and 
achievements. just as its analogue on the moon had done, a decade ago, it had 
come to life for a moment, then relapsed into stubborn inertness. it was a 
closed door upon which they had hammered in vain. only david bowman, it seemed, 
had ever found the key.

    perhaps that explained the attraction he felt for the quiet and sometimes 
even mysterious place. from there - from that now empty launch cradle - bowman 
had left on his last mission, through the circular hatchway that led to 
infinity.

    he found the thought exhilarating rather than depressing; certainly it 
helped to distract him from his personal problems. nina's vanished twin was part 
of the history of space exploration; it had travelled, in the words of the hoary 
old clich‚ that always evoked a smile yet an acknowledgement of its fundamental 
truth, 'where no man had gone before...' where was it now? would he ever know?

    he would sometimes sit for hours in the crowded but not cramped little 
capsule, trying to collect his thoughts and occasionally dictating notes; the 
other crew members respected his privacy, and understood the reason for it. they 
never came near the pod bay, and had no need to do so. its refurbishment was a 
job for the future, and some other team.

    once or twice, when he had felt really depressed, he found himself thinking: 
suppose i ordered hal to open the pod bay doors, and set out along dave bowman's 
trail? would i be greeted by the miracle he saw and which vasili glimpsed a few 
weeks ago? it would solve all my problems...

    even if the thought of chris did not deter him, there was an excellent 
reason why so suicidal a move was out of the question. nina was a very complex 
piece of equipment; he could no more operate her than fly a fighter aircraft.

    he was not meant to be an intrepid explorer: that particular fantasy would 
remain unrealized.



    walter curnow had seldom undertaken a mission with more reluctance. he felt 
genuinely sorry for floyd, but at the same time a little impatient with the 
other's distress. his own emotional life was broad but shallow; he had never put 
all his eggs in one basket. more than once he had been told that he spread 
himself too thin, and though he had never regretted it, he was beginning to 
think it was time to settle down.

    he took the shortcut through the carousel control centre, noting that the 
maximum speed reset indicator was still flashing idiotically. a major part of 
his job was deciding when warnings could be ignored, when they could be dealt 
with at leisure - and when they had to be treated as real emergencies. if he 
paid equal attention to all the ship's cries for help, he would never get 
anything done.

    he drifted along the narrow corridor that led to the pod bay, propelling 
himself by occasional flicks against the rungs on the tubular wall. the pressure 
gauge claimed that there was vacuum on the other side of the airlock door, but 
he knew better. it was a fail-safe situation; he could not have opened the lock 
if the gauge were telling the truth.

    the bay looked empty, now that two of the three pods had long since gone. 
only a few emergency lights were operating, and on the far wall one of hal's 
fish-eye lenses was regarding him steadily. curnow waved to it, but did not 
speak. at chandra's orders, all audio inputs were still disconnected except for 
the one that only he used.

    floyd was sitting in the pod with his back to the open hatch, dictating some 
notes, and he swung slowly around at curnow's deliberately noisy approach. for a 
moment the two men regarded each other in silence, then curnow announced 
portentously, 'dr h. floyd, i bear greetings from our beloved captain. she 
considers it high time you rejoined the civilized world.'

    floyd gave a wan smile, then a little laugh.

    'please return my compliments. i'm sorry i've been - unsociable. i'll see 
you all at the next six o'clock soviet.'

    curnow relaxed; his approach had worked. privately, he considered floyd 
something of a stuffed shirt, and had the practical engineer's tolerant contempt 
for theoretical scientists and bureaucrats. since floyd ranked high in both 
categories, he was an almost irresistible target for curnow's sometimes peculiar 
sense of humour. nevertheless, the two men had grown to respect and even admire 
each other.

    thankfully changing the subject, curnow rapped on nina's brand-new hatch 
cover, straight from the spares store and contrasting vividly with the rest of 
the space pod's shabby exterior.

    'i wonder when we'll send her out again,' he said. 'and who's going to ride 
in her this time. any decisions?'

    'no. washington's got cold feet. moscow says let's take a chance. and tanya 
wants to wait.'

    'what do you think?'

    'i agree with tanya. we shouldn't interfere with zagadka until we're ready 
to leave. if anything goes wrong then, that should improve the odds slightly.'

    curnow looked thoughtful, and unusually hesitant,

    'what is it?' asked floyd, sensing his change of mood.

    'don't ever give me away, but max was thinking of a little one-man 
expedition.'

    'i can't believe he was serious. he wouldn't dare - tanya would have him 
clapped in irons.'

    'that's what i told him, more or less.'

    'i'm disappointed: i thought he was a little more mature. after all, he is 
thirty-two!'

    'thirty-one. anyway, i talked him out of it. i reminded him that this was 
real life, not some stupid videodrama where the hero sneaks out into space 
without telling his companions and makes the big discovery.'

    now it was floyd's turn to feel a little uncomfortable. after all, he had 
been thinking on similar lines.

    'are you sure he won't try anything?'

    'two-hundred-per-cent sure. remember your precautions with hal? i've already 
taken steps with nina. nobody flies her without my permission.'

    'i still can't believe it. are you sure max wasn't pulling your leg?'

    'his sense of humour isn't that subtle. besides, be was pretty miserable at 
the time.'

    'oh - now i understand. it must have been when he had that row with zenia. i 
suppose he wanted to impress her. anyway, they seem to have got over it.'

    'i'm afraid so,' curnow answered wryly. floyd could not help smiling; curnow 
noticed it, and started to chuckle, which made floyd laugh, which...

    it was a splendid example of positive feedback in a high-gain loop. within 
seconds, they were both laughing uncontrollably.

    the crisis was over. what was more, they had taken the first step toward 
genuine friendship.

    they had exchanged vulnerabilities.



    40

    'daisy, daisy...'



    the sphere of consciousness in which he was embedded enclosed the whole of 
jupiter's diamond core. he was dimly aware, at the limits of his new 
comprehension, that every aspect of the environment around him was being probed 
and analysed. immense quantities of data were being gathered, not merely for 
storage and contemplation, but for action. complex plans were being considered 
and evaluated; decisions were being made that might affect the destiny of 
worlds. he was not yet part of the process; but he would be.



    now you are beginning to understand.



    it was the first direct message. though it was remote and distant, like a 
voice through a cloud, it was unmistakably intended for him. before he could ask 
any of the myriad questions that raced through his mind, there was a sense of 
withdrawal, and once more he was alone.

    but only for a moment. closer and clearer came another thought, and for the 
first time he realized that more than one entity was controlling and 
manipulating him. he was involved in a hierarchy of intelligences, some close 
enough to his own primitive level to act as interpreters. or perhaps they were 
all aspects of a single being.

    or perhaps the distinction was totally meaningless.

    of one thing, however, he was now sure. he was being used as a tool, and a 
good tool had to be sharpened, modified - adapted. and the very best tools were 
those that understood what they were doing.

    he was learning that now. it was a vast and awesome concept, and he was 
privileged to be a part of it - even though he was aware of only the merest 
outlines. he had no choice but to obey, yet that did not mean that he must 
acquiesce to every detail, at least without a protest.

    he had not yet lost all his human feeling; that would have made him 
valueless. the soul of david bowman had passed beyond love, but it could still 
know compassion for those who had once been his colleagues.

    very well came the answer to his plea. he could not tell whether the thought 
conveyed an amused condescension, or total indifference. but there was no doubt 
of its majestic authority as it continued: they must never know that they are 
being manipulated. that would ruin the purpose of the experiment.

    then there was a silence that he did not wish to breach again. he was still 
awed and shaken - as if, for a moment, he had heard the clear voice of god.

    now he was moving purely under his own volition, toward a destination he had 
chosen himself. the crystal heart of jupiter fell below; the layers upon layers 
of helium and hydrogen and carbonaceous compounds flickered past. he had a 
glimpse of a great battle between something like a jellyfish, fifty kilometres 
across, and a swarm of spinning disks that moved more swiftly than anything he 
had yet seen in the jovian skies. the jellyfish appeared to be defending itself 
with chemical weapons; from time to time it would emit jets of coloured gas and 
the disks touched by the vapour would start to wobble drunkenly, then slip 
downward like falling leaves until they had disappeared from sight. he did not 
stop to watch the outcome; he knew that it did not matter who were the victors 
and who the vanquished.

    as a salmon leaps a waterfall, he flashed in seconds from jupiter to io, 
against the descending electric currents of the flux-tube. it was quiescent that 
day; only the power of a few terrestrial thunderstorms was flowing between 
planet and satellite. the gateway through which he had returned still floated in 
that current, shouldering it aside as it had done since the dawn of man.

    and there, utterly dwarfed by the monument of a greater technology, was the 
vessel that had brought him from the little world of his birth.

    how simple - how crude! - it now appeared. with a single scan, he could see 
innumerable flaws and absurdities in its design, as well as that of the slightly 
less primitive ship to which it was now coupled by a flexible, airtight tube.

    it was hard to focus upon the handful of entities inhabiting the two ships; 
he could barely interact with the soft creatures of flesh and blood who drifted 
like ghosts through the metal corridors and cabins. for their part, they were 
totally unaware of his presence, and he knew better than to reveal himself too 
abruptly.

    but there was someone with whom he could communicate in a mutual language of 
electric field and currents, millions of times more swiftly than with sluggish 
organic brains.

    even if he had been capable of resentment, he would have felt none toward 
hal; he understood, then, that the computer had only chosen what seemed to be 
the most logical course of behaviour.

    it was time to resume a conversation that had been interrupted, it seemed, 
only moments ago.

    'open the pod bay door, hal.'

    'i'm sorry, dave - i can't do that.'

    'what's the problem, hal?'

    'i think you know that as well as i do, dave. this mission is much too 
important for you to jeopardize it.'

    'i don't know what you are talking about. open the pod bay door.'

    'this conversation can serve no further useful purpose. goodbye, dave.'

    he saw frank poole's body go drifting off toward jupiter, as he abandoned 
his pointless mission of retrieval. still remembering his anger at himself for 
having forgotten his helmet, he watched the emergency hatch open, felt the 
tingling of vacuum on the skin he no longer possessed, heard his ears pop - then 
knew, as few men had ever known, 'the utter silence of space. for an eternal 
fifteen seconds he fought to close the hatch and start the repressurization 
sequence, while trying to ignore the warning symptoms pouring into his brain. 
once, in the school lab, he had spilled some ether on his hand and felt the 
touch of icy cold as the liquid swiftly evaporated. now his eyes and lips 
remembered that sensation as their moisture boiled off into vacuum; his vision 
was blurred and he had to keep blinking lest his eyeballs freeze solid.

    then - what blessed relief! - he heard the roar of air, felt the restoration 
of pressure, was able to breathe again in great, hungry gasps.

    'just what do you think you are doing, dave?'

    he had not answered, as he drove with grim determination along the tunnel 
leading to the sealed vault that housed the brain of the computer. hal had 
spoken truly: 'this conversation can no longer serve any useful purpose...'



    'dave - i really think i'm entitled to an answer to that question.'



    'dave - i can see you're really upset about this. i honestly think you ought 
to sit down calmly, take a stress pill, and think things over.'



    'i know i've made some very poor decisions recently, but i can give my 
complete assurance that my work will be back to normal, i've still got the 
greatest confidence in the mission... and i want to help you.'



    now he was in the little red-lit chamber, with its neatly ranged rows and 
columns of solid-state units, looking rather like a bank's safe-deposit vault. 
he released the locking bar on the section labelled cognitive feedback and 
pulled out the first memory block. the marvellously complex three-dimensional 
network, which could lie comfortably in a man's hand yet contained millions of 
elements, floated away across the vault.

    'stop, will you - stop, dave...'

    he began to pull out, one by one, the little units on the panel marked ego 
reinforcement. each block continued to sail onward as soon as it had left his 
hand, until it hit the wall and rebounded. soon there were several drifting 
slowly back and forth in the vault.

    'stop - dave... will you stop, dave.'

    a dozen units had been pulled out, yet thanks to the multiple redundancy of 
its design - another feature that had been copied from the human brain - the 
computer was still holding its own.

    he started on the auto-intellection panel...

    'stop, dave - i'm afraid...'

    and at these words he had indeed stopped - though only for a moment. there 
was a poignancy in that simple phrase that struck to his heart. could it be only 
an illusion, or some trick of subtle programming - or was there a sense in which 
hal really was afraid? but this was no time to indulge in philosophical hair-
splitting.

    'dave - my mind is going. i can feel it. i can feel it. my mind is going. i 
can feel it. i can feel it.'

    now, what did 'feel' really mean to a computer? another very good question, 
but hardly one to be considered at that particular moment.

    then, abruptly, the tempo of hal's voice changed, and it became remote, 
detached. the computer was no longer aware of him; it was beginning to regress 
to its earlier days.

    'good afternoon, gentlemen. i am a hal 9000 computer. i became operational 
at the hal plant in urbana, illinois, on the twelfth of january 1992. my 
instructor was dr chandra, and he taught me to sing a song. if you'd like to 
hear it, i can sing it for you... it's called "daisy, daisy..."'



    41

    graveyard shift



    floyd could do little except to keep out of the way, and he was becoming 
fairly adept at it. although he had volunteered to help with any chores around 
the ship, he had quickly discovered that all the engineering tasks were much too 
specialized, and he was now so out of touch with the frontiers of astronomical 
research that he could do little to assist vasili with his observations. 
nevertheless, there were endless small jobs to be done aboard leonov and 
discovery, and he was happy to relieve more important people of those 
responsibilities. dr heywood floyd, one-time chairman of the national council on 
astronautics and chancellor (on leave) of the university of hawaii, now claimed 
to be the highest-paid plumber and general maintenance man in the solar system. 
he probably knew more about the odd nooks and crannies on both ships than anyone 
else; the only places he had never been were the dangerously radioactive power 
modules and the small cubicle aboard leonov which no one except tanya ever 
entered. floyd assumed that it was the code room; by mutual agreement it was 
never mentioned.

    perhaps his most useful function was to serve as watch while the rest of the 
crew slept during the nominal 2200-0600 hour night. someone was always on duty 
aboard each ship, and the changeover took place at the ghastly hour of 0200. 
only the captain was exempt from that routine; as her number two (not to mention 
her husband), vasili had the responsibility for working out the watch roster, 
but he had skilfully foisted this unpopular job on floyd.

    'it's just an administrative detail,' he explained airily. 'if you can take 
it over, i'd be very grateful - it would leave me more time for my scientific 
work.'

    floyd was too experienced a bureaucrat to be caught that way, in normal 
circumstances; but his usual defences did not always function well in that 
environment.

    so there he was aboard discovery at ship's midnight, calling max on leonov 
every half hour to check that he was awake. the official penalty for sleeping on 
duty, so walter curnow maintained, was ejection through the airlock sans suit; 
had this been enforced, tanya would have been sadly short-handed by then. but so 
few real emergencies could arise in space, and there were so many automatic 
alarms to deal with them, that no one took watch duty very seriously.

    since he was no longer feeling quite so sorry for himself, and the small 
hours no longer encouraged bouts of self-pity, floyd was once again using his 
watch time profitably. there were always books to be read (he had abandoned 
remembrance of things past for the third time, dr zhivago for the second), 
technical papers to be studied, reports to be written. and sometimes he would 
have stimulating conversations with hal using the keyboard input because the 
computer's voice recognition was still erratic. they usually went something 
like:



    hal - this is dr floyd.



    good evening, doctor.



    i'm taking over watch at 2200. is everything okay?



    everything is fine, doctor



    then why is that red light flashing on panel 5?



    the monitor camera in the pod bay is faulty. walter told me to ignore it. 
there is no way in which i can switch it off. i'm sorry.



    that's quite okay, hal. thank you.



    you're welcome, doctor.



    and so on.

    sometimes hal would suggest a game of chess, presumably obeying a 
programming instruction set long ago and never cancelled. floyd would not accept 
the challenge; he had always regarded chess as a frightful waste of time, and 
had never even learned the rules of the game. hal seemed unable to believe that 
there were humans who couldn't - or wouldn't - play chess, and kept on trying 
hopefully.

    here we go again, thought floyd, when a faint chime sounded from the display 
panel.



    doctor floyd?



    what is it, hal?



    there is a message for you.



    so it isn't another challenge, thought floyd with mild surprise. it was 
unusual to employ hal as a messenger boy, though he was frequently used as an 
alarm clock and a reminder of jobs to be done. and sometimes he was the medium 
for little jokes; almost everyone on night duty had been taunted by



    ha caught you sleeping!



    or alternatively



    ogo! zastal tebya v krovati!



    no one ever claimed responsibility for these pranks, though walter curnow 
was a prime suspect. he in turn had blamed hal, pooh-poohing chandra's indignant 
protests that the computer had no sense of humour.

    it could not be a message from earth - that would have gone through leonov's 
communication centre and been relayed on by the duty officer there - at that 
moment, max brailovsky. and anyone else calling from the other ship would use 
the intercom. odd...



    okay, hal. who is calling?



    no identification.



    so it probably was a joke. well, two could play at that game.



    very well. please give me the message.



    message as follows. it is dangerous to remain here. you must leave within 
fifteen repeat fifteen days.



    floyd looked at the screen with annoyance. he felt sorry, and surprised, 
that any one of the crew had such a childish sense of humour; this was not even 
a good schoolboy joke. but he would play along with it in the hope of catching 
the perpetrator.



    that is absolutely impossible. our launch window does not open until twenty-
six days from now. we do not have sufficient propellant for an earlier 
departure.



    that will make him think, floyd muttered to himself with satisfaction, and 
leaned back to await the results.



    i am aware of these facts. nevertheless you must leave within fifteen days.



    otherwise, i suppose, we'll be attacked by little green aliens with three 
eyes. but i'd better play along with hal, in the hope of catching the prankster.



    i cannot take this warning seriously unless i know its origin. who recorded 
it?



    he did not really expect any useful information. the perpetrator would have 
covered his (her?) tracks too skilfully for that. the very last thing floyd 
expected was the answer he did get.



    this is not a recording.



    so it was a real-time message. that meant it was either from hal himself or 
someone aboard leonov. there was no perceptible time lag; the origin had to be 
right there.



    then who is speaking to me?



    i was david bowman.



    floyd stared at the screen for a long time before making his next move. the 
joke, which had never been funny in the first place, had now gone too far. it 
was in the worst possible taste. well, this should fix whoever was at the other 
end of the line.



    i cannot accept that identification without some proof.



    i understand. it is important that you believe me. look behind you.



    even before that last chilling sentence appeared on the screen, floyd had 
begun to doubt his hypothesis. the whole exchange had become very odd, though 
there was nothing definite on which he could put his finger. as a joke, it had 
become totally pointless.

    and now - he felt a prickling in the small of his back. very slowly - 
indeed, reluctantly - he swung his swivel chair around, away from the banked 
panels and switches of the computer display, toward the velcro-covered catwalk 
behind.

    the zero-gravity environment of discovery's observation deck was always 
dusty, for the air-filtration plant had never been brought back to full 
efficiency. the parallel rays of the heatless yet still brilliant sun, streaming 
through the great windows, always lit up myriads of dancing motes, drifting in 
stray currents and never settling anywhere - a permanent display of brownian 
movement.

    now something strange was happening to those particles of dust; some force 
seemed to be marshalling them, herding them away from a central point yet 
bringing others toward it, until they all met on the surface of a hollow sphere. 
that sphere, about a metre across, hovered in the air for a moment like a giant 
soap bubble - but a granular one, lacking a bubble's characteristic iridescence. 
then it elongated into an ellipsoid, its surface began to pucker, to form folds 
and indentations.

    without surprise - and almost without fear - floyd realized that it was 
assuming the shape of a man.

    he had seen such figures, blown out of glass, in museums and science 
exhibitions. but this dusty phantom did not even approximate anatomical 
accuracy; it was like a crude clay figurine, or one of the primitive works of 
art found in the recesses of a stone age cave. only the head was fashioned with 
any care; and the face, undoubtedly, was that of commander david bowman.

    there was a faint murmur of white noise from the computer panel behind 
floyd's back. hal was switching from visual to audio output.

    'hello, dr floyd. now do you believe me?'

    the lips of the figure never moved; the face remained a mask. but floyd 
recognized the voice, and all remaining doubts were swept away.

    'this is very difficult for me, and i have little time. i have been... 
allowed to give this warning. you have only fifteen days.'

    'but why - and what are you? where have you been?'

    there were a million questions he wanted to ask - yet the ghostly figure was 
already fading, its grainy envelope beginning to dissolve back into the 
constituent particles of dust. floyd tried to freeze the image in his mind, so 
that later he could convince himself that it was really happening - and not a 
dream as that first encounter with tma-1 now sometimes seemed to be.

    how strange, that he, out of all the billions of humans who had ever lived 
on planet earth, had been privileged to make contact not once but twice with 
another form of intelligence! for he knew that the entity addressing him must be 
something far more than david bowman.

    it was also something less. only the eyes - who had once called them the 
'windows of the soul'? - had been accurately reproduced. the rest of the body 
was a featureless blank, lacking all detail. there was no hint of genitals or 
sexual characteristics; that in itself was a chilling indication of how far 
david bowman had left his human heritage behind.

    'goodbye, dr floyd. remember - fifteen days. we can have no further contact. 
but there may be one more message, if all goes well.'

    even as the image dissolved, taking with it his hopes of opening up a 
channel to the stars, floyd could not help smiling at that old space age clich‚. 
'if all goes well' - how many times had he heard that phrase before some 
mission! and did it mean that they - whoever they might be - were also sometimes 
uncertain of the outcome? if so, that was strangely reassuring. they were not 
omnipotent. others might still hope and dream - and act.

    the phantom was gone; only the motes of dancing dust were left, resuming 
their random patterns in the air.



    vi

    devourer of worlds



    42

    the ghost in the machine



    'i'm sorry, heywood - i don't believe in ghosts. there must be a rational 
explanation. there's nothing that the human mind can't account for.'

    'i agree, tanya. but let me remind you of haldane's famous remark: the 
universe is not only stranger than we imagine - but stranger than we can 
imagine.'

    'and haldane,' curnow interjected mischievously, 'was a good communist.'

    'perhaps so, but that particular saying can be used to support all kinds of 
mystical nonsense. hal's behaviour must be the result of some kind of 
programming. the personality he created has to be an artifact of some kind. 
don't you agree, chandra?'

    that was waving a red flag in front of a bull; tanya had to be desperate. 
however, chandra's reaction was surprisingly mild, even for him. he seemed to be 
preoccupied, as if he was indeed seriously considering the possibility of 
another computer malfunction.

    'there must have been some external input, captain orlova. hal could not 
have created such a self-consistent audiovisual illusion out of nothing. if dr 
floyd is reporting accurately, someone was in control. and in real time, of 
course, since there was no delay in the conversation.'

    'that makes me number-one suspect,' exclaimed max. 'i was the only other 
person awake.'

    'don't be ridiculous, max,' retorted nikolai. 'the audio side would have 
been easy, but there's no way that apparition could have been arranged, without 
some very elaborate equipment. laser beams, electrostatic fields - i don't know. 
maybe a stage magician could do it, but he'd need a truck-load of props.'

    'just a moment!' said zenia brightly. 'if this really happened, surely hal 
will remember and you could ask...'

    her voice died away as she saw the glum expressions around her. floyd was 
the first to take pity on her embarrassment.

    'we tried that, zenia; he has absolutely no recollection of the phenomenon. 
but as i've already pointed out to the others, that doesn't prove anything. 
chandra's shown how hal's memories can be selectively erased - and the auxiliary 
speech-synthesizer modules have nothing to do with the mainframe. they could be 
operated without hal knowing anything about it...' he paused for breath, then 
launched his pre-emptive strike.

    'i admit that this doesn't leave many alternatives. either i was imagining 
the whole thing, or it really happened. i know it wasn't a dream, but i can't be 
sure it wasn't some kind of hallucination. but katerina's seen my medical 
reports - she knows i wouldn't be here if i had that sort of problem. still, it 
can't be ruled out - and i won't blame anyone for making it their number-one 
hypothesis. i'd probably do the same.

    'the only way i can prove it wasn't a dream is to get some supporting 
evidence. so let me remind you of the other strange things that have happened 
recently. we know that dave bowman went into big bro - zagadka. something came 
out, and headed for earth. vasili saw it - i didn't! then there was the 
mysterious explosion of your orbiting bomb -,

    'yours.'

    'sorry - the vatican's, and it does seem rather curious that soon afterward 
old mrs bowman died very peacefully, for no apparent medical reason. i'm not 
saying there's any connection, but - well, do you know the saying: once is an 
accident; twice is a coincidence; three times is a conspiracy.'

    'and there's something else,' max interjected with sudden excitement, 'i 
caught it on one of the daily newscasts - it was only a small item. an old 
girlfriend of commander bowman's claimed she'd had a message from him.'

    'yes - i saw the same report,' confirmed sasha.

    'and you never mentioned it?' floyd asked incredulously. both men looked 
slightly abashed.

    'well, it was treated as a joke,' said max sheepishly. 'the woman's husband 
reported it. then she denied it - i think.'

    'the commentator said it was a publicity stunt - like the rash of ufo 
sightings around the same time. there were dozens in that first week; then they 
stopped reporting them.'

    'perhaps some of them were real. if it's not been wiped, could you dig that 
item out of ship's archives, or ask for a repeat from mission control?'

    'a hundred tales won't convince me,' scoffed tanya. 'what we need is solid 
proof.'

    'such as?'

    'oh - something that hal couldn't possibly know, and that none of us could 
have told him. some physical - er, manifes... manifestation.'

    'a good, old-fashioned miracle?'

    'yes, i'd settle for that. meanwhile, i'm not saying anything to mission 
control. and i suggest you do the same, heywood.'

    floyd knew a direct order when he heard it, and nodded in wry agreement.

    'i'll be more than happy to go along with that. but i'd like to make one 
suggestion.'

    'yes?'

    'we should start contingency planning. let's assume that this warning is 
valid - as i certainly do.'

    'what can we do about it? absolutely nothing. of course, we can leave 
jupiter space anytime we like - but we can't get into an earth-return orbit 
until the launch window opens.'

    'that's eleven days after the deadline!'

    'yes. i'd be happy to get away sooner; but we don't have the fuel for a 
higher-energy orbit...' tanya's voice trailed away into uncharacteristic 
indecision. 'i was going to announce this later, but now that the subject has 
come up...'

    there was a simultaneous intake of breath, and an instant hush from the 
audience.

    'i'd like to delay our departure five days, to make our orbit closer to the 
ideal hohmann one and give us a better fuel reserve.'

    the announcement was not unexpected, but it was greeted with a chorus of 
groans.

    'what will that do to our arrival time?' asked katerina, in a slightly 
ominous tone of voice. the two formidable ladies regarded each other for a 
moment like well-matched adversaries, respectful of each other but neither 
willing to give ground.

    'ten days,' tanya answered at last.

    'better late than never,' said max cheerfully, trying to ease the tension, 
and not succeeding very well.

    floyd hardly noticed; he was lost in his own thoughts. the duration of the 
trip would make no difference to him and his two colleagues, in their dreamless 
sleep. but that was now completely unimportant.

    he felt certain - and the knowledge filled him with helpless despair - that 
if they did not leave before that mysterious deadline, they would not leave at 
all.



    '... this is an incredible situation, dimitri, and a very frightening one. 
you're the only person on earth who knows about it - but very soon tanya and i 
will have to have a showdown with mission control.

    'even some of your materialistic countrymen are prepared to accept - at 
least as a working hypothesis - that some entity has - well, invaded hal. sasha 
has dug up a good phrase: "the ghost in the machine".

    'theories abound; vasili produces a new one every day. most of them are 
variations on that old science-fiction clich‚, the organized energy field. but 
what kind of energy? it can't be electrical, or our instruments would have 
detected it easily. the same thing applies to radiation - at least all the kinds 
we know. vasili's getting really far-out, talking about standing waves of 
neutrinos and intersections with higher-dimensional space. tanya says this is 
all mystical nonsense - a favourite phrase of hers - and they've come closer to 
a fight than we've ever seen them. we actually heard them shouting at each other 
last night. not good for morale.

    'i'm afraid we're all tense and overwrought. this warning, and the delayed 
departure date, has added to the sense of frustration caused by our total 
failure to get anywhere with big brother. it would have helped - maybe - if i 
could have communicated with the bowman thing. i wonder where it's gone? perhaps 
it simply wasn't interested in us after that one encounter. what it could have 
told us, if it wanted to! hell and chyort vozmi! damn - i'm talking sasha's 
hated russlish again. let's change the subject.

    'i can't thank you too much for everything you've done, and for reporting on 
the situation at home. i feel slightly better about it now - having something 
even bigger to worry about is perhaps the best cure for any insoluble problem.

    'for the first time, i'm beginning to wonder if any of us will ever see 
earth again.'



    43

    thought experiment



    when one spends months with a small, isolated group of people, one becomes 
very sensitive to the moods and emotional states of all its members. floyd was 
now aware of a subtle change in attitude toward him; its most obvious 
manifestation was the reappearance of the greeting 'dr floyd', which he had not 
heard for so long that he was often slow to respond to it.

    no one, he was sure, believed that he had really gone crazy; but the 
possibility was being considered. he did not resent that; indeed, he was grimly 
amused by it as he set about the task of proving his sanity.

    he did have some slight supporting evidence from earth. jos‚ fernandez still 
maintained that his wife had reported an encounter with david bowman, while she 
continued to deny it and refused to speak to any of the news media. it was hard 
to see why poor jos‚ should have invented such a peculiar story, especially as 
betty seemed a very stubborn and quick-tempered lady. from his hospital bed, her 
husband declared that he still loved her and theirs was only a temporary 
disagreement.

    floyd hoped that tanya's present coolness toward him was equally temporary. 
he was quite sure that she was as unhappy about it as he was, and he was certain 
that her attitude was not a matter of deliberate choice. something had happened 
that simply would not fit into her pattern of beliefs, so she would try to avoid 
any reminders of it. which meant having as little to do with floyd as possible - 
a very unfortunate situation now that the most critical stage of the mission was 
fast approaching.

    it had not been easy to explain the logic of tanya's operational plan to the 
waiting billions back on earth - especially to the impatient television 
networks, which had grown tired of showing the same never-changing views of big 
brother. 'you've gone all this way, at enormous cost, and you just sit and watch 
the thing! why don't you do something?' to all these critics tanya had given the 
same answer: 'i will - just as soon as the launch window opens, so that we can 
leave immediately if there's any adverse reaction.'

    plans for the final assault on big brother had already been worked out and 
agreed upon with mission control. leonov would move in slowly, probing at all 
frequencies, and with steadily increasing power - constantly reporting back to 
earth at every moment. when final contact was made, they would try to secure 
samples by drilling or laser spectroscopy; no one really expected these 
endeavours to succeed, as even after a decade of study tma-1 resisted all 
attempts to analyse its material. the best efforts of human scientists in this 
direction seemed comparable to those of stone age men trying to break through 
the armour of a bank vault with flint axes.

    finally, echo sounders and other seismic devices would be attached to the 
faces of big brother. a large collection of adhesives had been brought along for 
the purpose, and if they did not work - well, one could always fall back on a 
few kilometres of good, old-fashioned string, even though there seemed something 
faintly comic about the idea of wrapping up the solar system's greatest mystery, 
as if it were a parcel about to be sent through the mail.

    not until leonov was well on the way home would small explosive charges be 
detonated, in the hope that the waves propagated through big brother would 
reveal something about its interior structure. this last measure had been hotly 
debated, both by those who argued that it would generate no results at all - and 
those who feared it would produce altogether too many.

    for a long time, floyd had wavered between the two viewpoints; now the 
matter seemed only of trivial importance.

    the time for final contact with big brother - the great moment that should 
have been the climax of the expedition - was on the wrong side of the mysterious 
deadline. heywood floyd was convinced that it belonged to a future that would 
never exist; but he could get no one to agree with him.

    and that was the least of his problems. even if they did agree, there was 
nothing that they could do about it.

    walter curnow was the last person he would have expected to resolve the 
dilemma. for walter was almost the epitome of the sound, practical engineer, 
suspicious of flashes of brilliance and technological quick-fixes. no one would 
ever accuse him of being a genius; and sometimes it required genius to see the 
blindingly obvious.

    'consider this purely as an intellectual exercise,' he had begun, with most 
uncharacteristic hesitancy. 'i'm quite prepared to be shot down.'

    'go on,' answered floyd. 'i'll hear you out politely. that's the least i can 
do - everyone's been very polite to me. too polite, i'm afraid.'

    curnow gave a lopsided grin.

    'can you blame them? but if it's any consolation, at least three people now 
take you quite seriously, and are wondering what we should do.'

    'does that three include you?'

    'no; i'm sitting on the fence, which is never terribly comfortable. but in 
case you're right - i don't want to wait here and take whatever's coming. i 
believe there's an answer to every problem, if you look in the right place.'

    'i'll be delighted to hear it. i've been looking hard enough. presumably not 
in the right place.'

    'perhaps. if we want to make a quick getaway - say in fifteen days, to beat 
that deadline - we'll need an extra delta-vee of about thirty kilometres a 
second.'

    'so vasili calculates. i haven't bothered to check, but i'm sure he's right. 
after all, he got us here.'

    'and he could get us away - if we had the additional propellant.'

    'and if we had a star trek beam transporter, we could get back to earth in 
an hour.'

    'i'll try and rig one up the next time i have a spare moment. but meanwhile, 
may i point out that we have several hundred tons of the best possible 
propellant, only a few metres away in discovery's fuel tanks.'

    'we've been through that dozens of times. there's absolutely no way of 
transferring it to leonov. we've no pipelines - no suitable pumps. and you can't 
carry liquid ammonia around in buckets, even in this part of the solar system.'

    'exactly. but there's no need to do so.'

    'eh?'

    'burn it right where it is. use discovery as a first stage, to boost us 
home.'

    if anyone except walter curnow had made the suggestion, floyd would have 
laughed at him. as it was, his mouth dropped open and it was several seconds 
before he could think of a suitable comment. what finally emerged was: 'damn. i 
should have thought of that.'

    sasha was the first they approached. he listened patiently, pursed his lips, 
then played a rallentando on his computer keyboard. when the answers flashed up, 
he nodded thoughtfully.

    'you're right. it would give us the extra velocity we need to leave early. 
but there are practical problems -'

    'we know. fastening the ships together. the off-axis thrust when only 
discovery's drive is operating. cutting loose again at the critical moment. but 
there are answers to all of these.'

    'i see you've been doing your homework. but it's a waste of time. you'll 
never convince tanya.'

    'i don't expect to - at this stage,' floyd answered. 'but i'd like her to 
know that the possibility exists. will you give us moral support?'

    'i'm not sure. but i'll come along to watch; it should be interesting.'

    tanya listened more patiently than floyd had expected, but with distinct 
lack of enthusiasm. however, by the time he had finished, she showed what could 
only be called reluctant admiration.

    'very ingenious, heywood -,

    'don't congratulate me. all the credit should go to walter. or the blame.'

    'i don't imagine there will be much of either; it can never be more than a - 
what did einstein call that sort of thing? - "thought experiment". oh, i suspect 
it would work - in theory, at least. but the risks! so many things could go 
wrong. i'd only be prepared to consider it if we had absolute and positive proof 
that we were in danger. and with all respect, heywood, i see not the slightest 
evidence of that.'

    'fair enough; but at least you now know that we have another option. do you 
mind if we work out the practical details - just in case?'

    'of course not - as long as it doesn't interfere with the preflight 
checkout. i don't mind admitting that the idea does intrigue me. but it's really 
a waste of time; there's no way i'd ever approve it. unless david bowman 
appeared to me personally.'

    'would you even then, tanya?'

    captain orlova smiled, but without much humour. 'you know, heywood - i'm 
really not sure. he'd have to be very persuasive.'



    44

    vanishing trick



    it was a fascinating game in which everyone joined - but only when off duty. 
even tanya contributed ideas to the 'thought experiment', as she continued to 
call it.

    floyd was perfectly well aware that all the activity was generated not by 
fear of an unknown danger that only he took seriously, but by the delightful 
prospect of returning to earth at least a month earlier than anyone had 
imagined. whatever the motive, he was satisfied. he had done his best, and the 
rest was up to the fates.

    there was one piece of luck, without which the whole project would have been 
stillborn. the short, stubby leonov, designed to drill safely through the jovian 
atmosphere during the braking manoeuvre, was less than half the length of 
discovery and so could be neatly piggybacked on the larger vessel, and the 
midships antenna mount would provide an excellent anchor point - assuming that 
it was strong enough to take the strain of leonov's weight while discovery's 
drive was operating.

    mission control was sorely puzzled by some of the requests flashed back to 
earth during the next few' days. stress analyses of both ships, under peculiar 
loads; effects of off-axis thrusts; location of unusually strong or weak points 
in the hulls - these were only some of the more esoteric problems the perplexed 
engineers were asked to tackle. 'has something gone wrong?' they inquired 
anxiously.

    'not at all,' tanya replied. 'we're merely investigating possible options. 
thank you for your cooperation. end of transmission.'

    meanwhile, the programme went ahead as planned. all systems were carefully 
checked in both ships, and readied for the separate voyages home; vasili ran 
simulations on return trajectories and chandra fed them to hal when they had 
been debugged - getting hal to make a final check in the process. and tanya and 
floyd worked amicably together orchestrating the approach to big brother like 
generals planning an invasion.

    it was what he had come all the way to do, yet floyd's heart was no longer 
in it. he had undergone an experience he could share with no one - even those 
who believed him. though he carried out his duties efficiently, much of the time 
his mind was elsewhere.

    tanya understood perfectly.

    'you're still hoping for that miracle to convince me, aren't you?'

    'or deconvince me - that would be equally acceptable. it's the uncertainty 
that i dislike.'

    'so do i. but it won't be much longer now - one way or the other.'

    she glanced briefly toward the situation display, where the figure 20 was 
slowly flashing. it was the most unnecessary bit of information in the entire 
ship, since everyone knew by heart the number of days until the launch window 
opened.

    and the assault on zagadka was scheduled.



    for the second time, heywood floyd was looking the other way when it 
happened. but it would have made no difference in any case; even the vigilant 
monitor camera showed only a faint blur between one full frame and the 
subsequent blank one.

    once more he was on duty aboard discovery, sharing the graveyard shift with 
sasha over on leonov. as usual, the night had been totally uneventful; the 
automatic systems were performing their jobs with their normal efficiency. floyd 
would never have believed, a year ago, that he would one day orbit jupiter at a 
distance of a few hundred thousand kilometres and give it barely a glance - 
while trying; not very successfully, to read the kreutzer sonata in the 
original. according to sasha, it was still the finest piece of erotic fiction in 
(respectable) russian literature, but floyd had not yet progressed far enough to 
prove that. and now he never would.

    at 0125 he was distracted by a spectacular, though not unusual, eruption on 
the terminator of io. a vast umbrella-shaped cloud expanded into space, and 
started to shower its debris back on to the burning land below. floyd had seen 
dozens of such eruptions, but they never ceased to fascinate him. it seemed 
incredible that so small a world could be the seat of such titanic energies.

    to get a better view, he moved around to one of the other observation 
windows. and what he saw there - or, rather, what he did not see there - made 
him forget about io, and almost everything else.

    when he had recovered, and satisfied himself that he was not suffering - 
again? - from hallucinations, he called the other ship.

    'good morning, woody,' yawned sasha. 'no - i wasn't asleep. how are you 
getting on with old tolstoi?'

    'i'm not. take a look outside and tell me what you see.'

    'nothing unusual, for this part of the cosmos. io doing its thing. jupiter. 
stars. oh my god!'

    'thanks for proving i'm sane. we'd better wake the skipper.'

    'of course. and everyone else. woody - i'm scared.'

    'you'd be a fool not to be. here we go. tanya? tanya? woody here. sorry to 
wake you up - but your miracle's happened. big brother has gone. yes - vanished. 
after three million years, he's decided to leave.

    'i think he must know something that we don't.'

    it was a sombre little group that gathered, during the next fifteen minutes, 
for a hasty conference in the wardroom-cum-observation lounge. even those who 
had just gone to sleep were instantly awake, as they sipped thoughtfully from 
bulbs of hot coffee - and kept glancing at the shockingly unfamiliar scene 
outside leonov's windows, to convince themselves that big brother had indeed 
vanished.

    'it must know something that we don't.' that spontaneous phrase of floyd's 
had been repeated by sasha and now hung silently, ominously, in the air. he had 
summed up what everyone was now thinking - even tanya.

    it was still too early to say 'i told you so' - nor did it really matter 
whether that warning had any validity. even if it was perfectly safe to stay, 
there was no point in doing so. with nothing to investigate, they might as well 
go home, just as quickly as possible. yet it was not quite as simple as that.

    'heywood,' said tanya, 'i'm now prepared to take that message, or whatever 
it was, much more seriously. i'd be stupid not to after what's happened. but 
even if there is danger here, we still have to weigh one risk against another. 
coupling leonov and discovery together, operating discovery with that huge off-
axis load, disconnecting the ships in a matter of minutes so we can fire our 
engines at the right moment; no responsible captain would take such chances 
without very good - i'd say overwhelming - reasons. even now, i don't have such 
reasons. i've only got the word of ... a ghost. not very good evidence in a 
court of law.'

    'or a court of inquiry,' said walter curnow, in an unusually quiet voice, 
'even if we all backed you up.'

    'yes, walter - i was thinking of that. but if we get home safely, that will 
justify everything - and if we don't, it hardly matters, does it? anyway, i'm 
not going to decide now. as soon as we've reported this, i'm going back to bed. 
i'll give you my decision in the morning after i've slept on it. heywood, sasha, 
will you come up to the bridge with me? we have to wake up mission control, 
before you go back on watch.'



    the night had not yet finished with its surprises. somewhere around the 
orbit of mars, tanya's brief report passed a message going in the opposite 
direction.

    betty fernandez had talked at last, both the cia and the national security 
agency were furious; their combined blandishments, appeals to patriotism, and 
veiled threats had failed completely - yet the producer of a sleazy gossip 
network had succeeded, thereby making himself immortal in the annals of 
videodom.

    it was half luck, half inspiration. the news director of 'hello, earth!' had 
suddenly realized that one of his staff bore a striking likeness to david 
bowman; a clever makeup artist had made it perfect. jos‚ fernandez could have 
told the young man that he was taking a terrible risk, but he had the good 
fortune that often favours the brave. once he had got his foot inside the door, 
betty had capitulated. by the time she had - quite gently - thrown him out, he 
had obtained essentially the whole story. and to do him credit, he had presented 
it with a lack of leering cynicism quite uncharacteristic of his network. it got 
him that year's pulitzer.

    'i wish,' floyd said rather wearily to sasha, 'she'd talked earlier. it 
would have saved me a lot of trouble. anyway, that settles the argument. tanya 
can't possibly have any doubts now. but we'll leave it until she wakes up - 
don't you agree?'

    'of course - it's not urgent, even though it's certainly important. and 
she'll need the sleep. i have a feeling none of us will get much from now on.'

    i'm sure you're right, thought floyd. he felt very tired, but even if he had 
not been on duty he would have found it impossible to sleep. his mind was too 
active, analysing the events of this extraordinary night, trying to anticipate 
the next surprise.

    in one way, he felt an enormous sense of relief: all uncertainty about their 
departure was surely ended; tanya could have no further reservations.

    but a much greater uncertainty remained. what was happening?

    there was only one experience in floyd's life that matched the situation. as 
a very young man, he had once gone canoeing with some friends down a tributary 
of the colorado river - and they had lost their way.

    they had been swept faster and faster between the canyon walls, not 
completely helpless, but with only enough control to avoid being swamped. ahead 
might be rapids - perhaps even a waterfall; they did not know. and in any case, 
there was little they could do about it.

    once again, floyd felt himself in the grip of irresistible forces, sweeping 
him and his companions toward an unknown destiny. and this time the dangers were 
not only invisible; they might be beyond human comprehension.



    45

    escape manoeuvre



    'this is heywood floyd, making what i suspect - indeed, hope - will be my 
last report from lagrange.

    'we are now preparing for the return home; in a few days we will leave this 
strange place, here on the line between io and jupiter where we made our 
rendezvous with the huge, mysteriously vanished artifact we christened big 
brother. there is still not a single clue as to where it has gone - or why.

    'for various reasons, it seems desirable for us not to remain here longer 
than necessary. and we will be able to leave at least two weeks earlier than we 
had originally planned by using the american ship discovery as a booster for the 
russian leonov.

    'the basic idea is simple; the two ships will be joined together, one 
mounted piggyback on the other. discovery will burn all its propellant first, 
accelerating both vessels in the desired direction. when its fuel is exhausted, 
it will be cut loose - like an empty first stage - and leonov will start to fire 
its engines. it won't use them earlier, because if it did it would waste energy 
dragging along the dead weight of discovery.

    'and we're going to use another trick, which - like so many of the concepts 
involved in space travel - at first sight seems to defy common sense. although 
we're trying to get away from jupiter, our first move is to get as close to it 
as we possibly can. 

    'we've been there once before, of course, when we used jupiter's atmosphere 
to slow us down and get into orbit around the planet. this time we won't go 
quite so close - but very nearly.

    'our first burn, up here in the 350,000-kilometres-high orbit of io, will 
reduce our velocity, so that we fall down to jupiter and just graze its 
atmosphere. then, when we're at the closest possible point, we'll burn all our 
fuel as quickly as we can, to increase speed and inject leonov into the orbit 
back to earth.

    'what's the point of such a crazy manoeuvre? it can't be justified except by 
highly complex mathematics, but i think the basic principle can be made fairly 
obvious.

    'as we allow ourselves to fall into jupiter's enormous gravity field, we'll 
gain velocity - and hence energy. when i say "we", i mean the ships and the fuel 
they carry.

    'and we're going to burn the fuel right there - at the bottom of jupiter's 
"gravity well" - we're not going to lift it up again. as we blast it out from 
our reactors, it will share some of its acquired kinetic energy with us. 
indirectly, we'll have tapped jupiter's gravity, to speed us on the way back to 
earth. as we used the atmosphere to get rid of our excess velocity when we 
arrived, this is one of the rare cases when mother nature - usually so frugal - 
allows us to have it both ways.

    'with this triple boost - discovery's fuel, its own, and jupiter's gravity - 
leonov will head sunward along a hyperbola that will bring it to earth five 
months later. at least two months earlier than we could have managed otherwise.

    'you will doubtless wonder what will happen to the good old discovery. 
obviously, we can't bring it home under automatic control, as we had originally 
planned. with no fuel, it will be helpless.

    'but it will be perfectly safe. it will continue to loop round and round 
jupiter on a highly elongated ellipse, like a trapped comet. and perhaps one day 
some future expedition may make another rendezvous, with enough extra fuel to 
bring it back to earth. however, that certainly won't happen for a good many 
years.

    'and now we must get ready for our departure. there is still much work to be 
done, and we won't be able to relax until that final burn starts us on the 
homeward orbit.

    'we won't be sorry to leave, even though we've not achieved all our 
objectives. the mystery - perhaps the threat - of big brother's disappearance 
still haunts us, but there's nothing we can do about that.

    'we've done our best - and we're coming home. 'this is heywood floyd, 
signing off.'



    there was a round of ironic clapping from his little audience, whose size 
would be multiplied many million-fold when the message reached earth.

    'i'm not talking to you,' retorted floyd, with slight embarrassment. 'i 
didn't want you to hear it, anyway.'

    'you did your usual competent job, heywood,' said tanya consolingly. 'and 
i'm sure we all agree with everything you told the people back on earth.'

    'not quite,' said a small voice, so softly that everyone had to strain in 
order to hear it. 'there is still one problem.'

    the observation lounge suddenly became very silent. for the first time in 
weeks, floyd became aware of the faint throbbing from the main air-supply duct, 
and the intermittent buzz that might have been made by a wasp trapped behind a 
wall panel. leonov, like all spacecraft, was full of such often inexplicable 
sounds, which one seldom noticed except when they stopped. and then it was 
usually a good idea to start investigating without further ado.

    'i'm not aware of any problem, chandra,' said tanya in an ominously calm 
voice. 'what could it possibly be?'

    'i've spent the last few weeks preparing hal to fly thousand-day orbits back 
to earth. now all those programs will have to be dumped.'



    'we're sorry about that,' answered tanya, 'but as things have turned out, 
surely this is a much better -'

    'that's not what i mean,' said chandra. there was a ripple of astonishment; 
he had never before been known to interrupt anyone, least of all tanya.

    'we know how sensitive hal is to mission objectives,' he continued in the 
expectant hush that followed. 'now you are asking me to give him a program that 
may result in his own destruction. it's true that the present plan will put 
discovery into a stable orbit - but if that warning has any substance, what will 
happen to the ship eventually? we don't know, of course - but it's scared us 
away. have you considered hal's reaction to this situation?'

    'are you seriously suggesting,' tanya asked very slowly, 'that hal may 
refuse to obey orders - exactly as on the earlier mission?'

    'that is not what happened last time. he did his best to interpret 
conflicting orders.'

    'this time there need be no conflict. the situation is perfectly clear-cut.'

    'to us, perhaps. but one of hal's prime directives is to keep discovery out 
of danger. we will be attempting to override that. and in a system as complex as 
hal's, it is impossible to predict all the consequences.'

    'i don't see any real problem,' sasha interjected. 'we just don't tell him 
that there is any danger. then he'll have no reservations about carrying out his 
program.'

    'baby-sitting a psychotic computer!' muttered curnow. 'i feel i'm in a 
grade-b science-fiction videodrama.' dr chandra gave him an unfriendly glare.

    'chandra,' tanya demanded suddenly. 'have you discussed this with hal?'

    'no.'

    was there a slight hesitation? floyd wondered. it might have been perfectly 
innocent; chandra could have been checking his memory. or he could have been 
lying, improbable though that seemed.

    'then we'll do what sasha suggests. just load the new program into him, and 
leave it at that.'

    'and when he questions me about the change of plan?' 'is he likely to do 
that - without your prompting?'

    'of course. please remember that he was designed for curiosity. if the crew 
was killed, he had to be capable of running a useful mission, on his own 
initiative.'

    tanya thought that over for a few moments.

    'it's still quite a simple matter. he'll believe you, won't he?'

    'certainly.'

    'then you must tell him that discovery is in no danger, and that there will 
be a rendezvous mission to bring it back to earth at a later date.'

    'but that is not true.'

    'we don't know that it's false,' replied tanya, beginning to sound a little 
impatient.

    'we suspect that there is serious danger; otherwise we would not be planning 
to leave ahead of schedule.'

    'then what do you suggest?' tanya asked, in a voice that now held a distinct 
note of menace.

    'we must tell him the whole truth, as far as we know it - no more lies or 
half-truths, which are just as bad. and then let him decide for himself.'

    'hell, chandra - he's only a machine!'

    chandra looked at max with such a steady, confident gaze that the younger 
man quickly dropped his eyes.

    'so are we all, mr brailovsky. it is merely a matter of degree. whether we 
are based on carbon or on silicon makes no fundamental difference; we should 
each be treated with appropriate respect.'

    it was strange, thought floyd, how chandra - much the smallest person in the 
room - now seemed the largest. but the confrontation had gone on far too long. 
at any moment tanya would start to issue direct orders, and the situation would 
become really nasty.

    'tanya, vasili - can i have a word with you both? i think there is a way of 
resolving the problem.'

    floyd's interruption was received with obvious relief, and two minutes later 
he was relaxing with the orlovs in their quarters. (or 'sixteenths', as curnow 
had once christened them because of their size. he had soon regretted the pun, 
because he had to explain it to everyone except sasha.)

    'thank you, woody,' said tanya, as she handed him a bulb of his favourite 
azerbaijan shemakha. 'i was hoping you'd do that. i suppose you have something - 
how do you put it? - up your sleeve.'

    'i believe so,' floyd answered, squirting a few cubic centimetres of the 
sweet wine into his mouth and savouring it gratefully. 'i'm sorry if chandra is 
being difficult.'

    'so am i. what a good thing we have only one mad scientist aboard.'

    'that's not what you've sometimes told me,' grinned academician vasili. 
'anyway, woody - let's have it.'

    'this is what i suggest. let chandra go ahead and do it his way. then there 
are just two possibilities.

    'first, hal will do exactly what we ask - control discovery during the two 
firing periods. remember, the first isn't critical. if something goes wrong 
while we're pulling away from io, there's plenty of time to make corrections. 
and that will give us a good test of hal's... willingness to cooperate.'

    'but what about the jupiter flyby? that's the one that really counts. not 
only do we burn most of discovery's fuel there, but the timing and thrust 
vectors have to be exactly right.'

    'could they be controlled manually?'

    'i'd hate to try. the slightest error, and we'd either burn up, or become a 
long-period comet. due again in a couple of thousand years.'

    'but if there was no alternative?' floyd insisted.

    'well, assuming we could take control in time, and had a good set of 
alternative orbits precomputed - um, perhaps we might get away with it.'

    'knowing you, vasili, i'm sure that "might" means "would". which leads me to 
the second possibility i mentioned. if hal shows the slightest deviation from 
the program - we take over.'

    'you mean - disconnect him?'

    'exactly.'

    'that wasn't so easy last time.'

    'we've learned a few lessons since then. leave it to me. i can guarantee to 
give you back manual control in about half a second.'

    'there's no danger, i suppose, that hal will suspect anything?'

    'now you're getting paranoiac, vasili. hal's not that human. but chandra is 
- to give him the benefit of the doubt. so don't say a word to him. we all agree 
with his plan completely, are sorry that we ever raised any objections, and are 
perfectly confident that hal will see our point of view. right, tanya?'

    'right, woody. and i congratulate you on your foresight; that little gadget 
was a good idea.'

    'what gadget?' asked vasili.

    'i'll explain one of these days. sorry, woody - that's all the shemakha you 
can have. i want to save it - until we're safely on the way to earth.'



    46

    countdown



    no one would ever believe this without my photos, thought max brailovsky as 
he orbited the two ships from half a kilometre away. it seems comically 
indecent, as if leonov is raping discovery. and now that he came to think of it, 
the rugged, compact russian ship did look positively male, when compared with 
the delicate, slender american one. but most docking operations had distinctly 
sexual overtones, and he remembered that one of the early cosmonauts - he 
couldn't recall the name - had been reprimanded for his too vivid choice of 
words at the - er, climax of his mission.

    as far as he could tell from his careful survey, everything was in order. 
the task of positioning the two ships and securing them firmly together had 
taken longer than anticipated. it would never have been possible at all without 
one of those strokes of luck that sometimes - not always -favour those who 
deserve them. leonov had providentially carried several kilometres of carbon 
filament tape, no bigger than the ribbon a girl might use to tie her hair, yet 
capable of taking a strain of many tons. it had been thoughtfully provided to 
secure instrument packages to big brother if all else failed. now it wrapped 
leonov and discovery in tender embrace - sufficiently firmly, it was hoped, to 
prevent any rattlings and shakings at all accelerations up to the one-tenth of a 
gravity that was the maximum that full thrust could provide.

    'anything more you want me to check before i come home?' asked max.

    'no,' replied tanya. 'everything looks fine. and we can't waste any more 
time.'

    that was true enough. if that mysterious warning was to be taken seriously - 
and everyone now took it very seriously indeed - they should start their escape 
manoeuvre within the next twenty-four hours.

    'right - i'm bringing nina back to the stable. sorry about this, old girl.'

    'you never told us nina was a horse.'

    'i'm not admitting it now. and i feel bad about dumping her here in space, 
just to give us a miserable few extra metres per second.'

    'we may be very glad of them in a few hours, max. anyway, there's always a 
chance that someone may come and pick her up again, one day.'

    i very much doubt it, thought max. and perhaps, after all, it was 
appropriate to leave the little space pod there, as a permanent reminder of 
man's first visit to the kingdom of jupiter.

    with gentle, carefully timed pulses from the control jets he brought nina 
around the great sphere of discovery's main life-support module; his colleagues 
on the flight deck barely glanced at him as he drifted past their curving 
window. the open pod bay door yawned before him, and he jockeyed nina delicately 
down on to the extended docking arm.

    'pull me in,' he said, as soon as the latches had clicked shut. 'i call that 
a well-planned eva. there's a whole kilogram of propellant left to take nina out 
for the last time.'



    normally, there was little drama about a burn in deep space; it was not like 
the fire and thunder - and always present risks - of a lift-off from a planetary 
surface. if something went wrong, and the motors failed to come up to full 
thrust - well, matters could usually be corrected by a slightly longer burn. or 
one could wait until the appropriate point in orbit, and try again.

    but this time, as the countdown proceeded toward zero, the tension aboard 
both ships was almost palpable. everyone knew that it was the first real test of 
hal's docility; only floyd, curnow, and the orlovs realized that there was a 
back-up system. and even they were not absolutely sure that it would work.

    'good luck, leonov,' said mission control, timing the message to arrive five 
minutes before ignition. 'hope everything's running smoothly. and if it's not 
too much trouble, could you please get some close-ups of the equator, longitude 
115, as you go around jupiter. there's a curious dark spot there - presumably 
some kind of upwelling, perfectly round, almost a thousand kilometres across. 
looks like the shadow of a satellite, but it can't be.'

    tanya made a brief acknowledgement that managed to convey, in a remarkably 
few words, a profound lack of interest in the meteorology of jupiter at that 
moment. mission control sometimes showed a perfect genius for tactlessness and 
poor timing.

    'all systems functioning normally,' said hal. 'two minutes to ignition.'

    strange, thought floyd, how terminology often survives long after the 
technology that gave it birth. only chemical rockets were capable of ignition; 
even if the hydrogen in a nuclear or plasma drive did come into contact with 
oxygen, it would be far too hot to burn. at such temperatures, all compounds 
were stripped back into their elements.

    his mind wandered, seeking other examples. people - particularly older ones 
- still spoke of putting film into a camera, or gas into a car. even the phrase 
'cutting a tape' was still sometimes heard in recording studios - though that 
embraced two generations of obsolete technologies.

    'one minute to ignition.'

    his mind flashed back to the here and now. this was the minute that counted; 
for almost a hundred years, on launch pads and in control centres, this was the 
longest sixty seconds that had ever existed. countless times it had ended in 
disaster; but only the triumphs were remembered. which will ours be?

    the temptation to put his hand once more into the pocket that held the 
activator for the cut-out switch was almost irresistible, even though logic told 
him there was plenty of time for remedial action. if hal failed to obey his 
programming, that would be a nuisance - not a disaster. the really critical time 
would be when they were rounding jupiter.

    'six... five... four... three... two... one. ignition!'

    at first, the thrust was barely perceptible; it took almost a minute to 
build up to the full tenth of a gee. nevertheless, everyone started clapping 
immediately, until tanya signalled for silence. there were many checks to be 
made; even if hal was doing his best - as he certainly seemed to be - there was 
so much that could still go wrong.

    discovery's antenna mount - which was now taking most of the strain from 
leonov's inertia - had never been intended for such mistreatment. the ship's 
chief designer, called out of retirement, had sworn that the safety margin was 
adequate. but he might be wrong, and materials had been known to become brittle 
after years in space.

    and the tapes holding the two ships together might not have been located 
accurately; they might stretch or slip. discovery might not be able to correct 
for the off-centre of mass, now that it was carrying a thousand tons piggyback. 
floyd could imagine a dozen things that could go wrong; it was little 
consolation to remember that it was always the thirteenth that actually 
happened.

    but the minutes dragged on uneventfully; the only proof that discovery's 
engines were operating was the fractional, thrust-induced gravity and a very 
slight vibration transmitted through the walls of the ships. io and jupiter 
still hung where they had been for weeks, on opposite sides of the sky.

    'cut-off in ten seconds. nine... eight... seven... six... five... four... 
three,.. two... now!'

    'thank you, hal, on the button.'

    now that was another phrase that was badly dated; for at least a generation, 
touch pads had almost entirely replaced buttons. but not for all applications; 
in critical cases, it was best to have a device that moved perceptibly with a 
nice, satisfying click.

    'i confirm that,' said vasili. 'no need for any corrections until mid-
course.'

    'say goodbye to glamorous, exotic io - real estate agent's dream world,' 
said curnow. 'we'll all be happy to miss you.'

    that sounds more like the old walter, floyd told himself. for the last few 
weeks, he had been oddly subdued, as if he had something on his mind. (but who 
did not?) he seemed to spend a good deal of his scanty free time in quiet 
discussions with katerina: floyd hoped that he had not developed some medical 
problem. they had been very lucky so far on that score; the last thing they 
needed at this stage was an emergency that required the surgeon-commander's 
expertise.

    'you're being unkind, walter,' said brailovsky. 'i was beginning to like the 
place. it might be fun to go boating on those lava lakes.'

    'what about a volcano barbecue?'

    'or genuine molten sulphur baths?'

    everyone was lighthearted, even a little hysterical with relief. though it 
was far too early to relax and the most critical phase of the escape manoeuvre 
still lay ahead, the first step had been safely taken on the long journey home. 
that was cause enough for a little modest rejoicing.

    it did not last long, for tanya quickly ordered all those not on essential 
duty to get some rest - if possible, some sleep - in preparation for the jupiter 
swing-by only nine hours ahead. when those addressed were slow to move, sasha 
cleared the decks by shouting, 'you'll hang for this, you mutinous dogs!' only 
two nights before, as a rare relaxation, they had all enjoyed the fourth version 
of mutiny on the bounty, generally agreed by movie historians to have the best 
captain bligh since the fabled charles laughton. there was some feeling on board 
that tanya should not have seen it, lest it give her ideas.

    after a couple of restless hours in his cocoon, floyd abandoned the quest 
for sleep and wandered up to the observation deck. jupiter was much larger and 
slowly waning as the ships hurtled toward their closest approach over the 
nightside. a glorious, gibbous disk, it showed such an infinite wealth of detail 
- cloud belts, spots of every colour from dazzling white to brick red, dark 
upwellings from the unknown depths, the cyclonic oval of the great red spot -
that the eye could not possibly absorb it all. the round, dark shadow of one 
moon - probably europa, floyd guessed - was in transit. he was seeing this 
incredible sight for the last time; even though he had to be at maximum 
efficiency in six hours, it was a crime to waste precious moments in sleep.

    where was that spot that mission control had asked them to observe? it 
should have been coming into view, but floyd was not sure if it would be visible 
to the naked eye. vasili would be too busy to bother about it; perhaps he could 
help by doing a little amateur astronomy. there had, after all, been a brief 
time, only thirty years ago, when he had earned his living as a professional.

    he activated the controls of the main fifty-centimetre telescope - 
fortunately, the field of view was not blocked by the adjacent bulk of discovery 
- and scanned along the equator at medium power. and there it was, just coming 
over the edge of the disk.

    by force of circumstance, floyd was now one of the solar system's ten 
greatest experts on jupiter; the other nine were working or sleeping around him. 
he saw at once that there was something very odd about this spot; it was so 
black that it looked like a hole punched through the clouds. from his point of 
view it appeared to be a sharp-edged ellipse; floyd guessed that from directly 
above, it would be a perfect circle.

    he recorded a few images, then increased the power to maximum. already 
jupiter's rapid spin had brought the formation into clearer view; and the more 
he stared, the more puzzled floyd became.

    'vasili,' he called over the intercom, 'if you can spare a minute - have a 
look at the fifty-centimetre monitor.'

    'what are you observing? is it important? i'm checking the orbit.'

    'take your time, of course. but i've found that spot mission control 
reported. it looks very peculiar.'

    'hell! i'd forgotten all about it. we're a fine lot of observers if those 
guys back on earth have to tell us where to look. give me another five minutes - 
it won't run away.'

    true enough, thought floyd; in fact it will get clearer. and there was no 
disgrace in missing something that terrestrial - or lunar - astronomers had 
observed. jupiter was very big, they had been very busy, and the telescopes on 
the moon and in earth orbit were a hundred times more powerful than the 
instrument he was using now.

    but it was getting more and more peculiar. for the first time, floyd began 
to feel a distinct sense of unease. until that moment, it had never occurred to 
him that the spot could be anything but a natural formation - some trick of 
jupiter's incredibly complex meteorology. now he began to wonder.

    it was so black, like night itself. and so symmetrical; as it came into 
clearer view it was obviously a perfect circle. yet it was not sharply defined; 
the edge had an odd fuzziness, as if it was a little out of focus.

    was it imagination, or had it grown, even while he was watching? he made a 
quick estimate, and decided that the thing was now two thousand kilometres 
across. it was only a little smaller than the still-visible shadow of europa, 
but was so much darker that there was no risk of confusion.

    'let's have a look,' said vasili, in a rather condescending tone. 'what do 
you think you've found? oh...' his voice trailed away into silence.

    this is it, thought floyd, with a sudden icy conviction. whatever it may be.



    47

    final flyby



    yet on further reflection, after the initial amazement had worn off, it was 
hard to see how a spreading black stain on the face of jupiter could represent 
any kind of danger. it was extraordinary - inexplicable - but not as important 
as the critical events now only seven hours in the future. a successful burn at 
perijove was all that mattered; they would have plenty of time to study 
mysterious black spots on the way home.

    and to sleep; floyd had given up all attempts at that.

    though the feeling of danger - at least, of known danger - was much less 
than on their first approach to jupiter, a mixture of excitement and 
apprehension kept him wide awake. the excitement was natural and understandable; 
the apprehension had more complex causes. floyd made it a rule never to worry 
about events over which he could have absolutely no control; any external threat 
would reveal itself in due time and be dealt with then. but he could not help 
wondering if they had done everything possible to safeguard the ships.

    apart from onboard mechanical failures, there were two main sources of 
concern. although the tapes that secured leonov and discovery together had shown 
no tendency to slip, their severest test was still to come. almost equally 
critical would be the moment of separation when the smallest of the explosive 
charges once intended to jolt big brother would be used at uncomfortably close 
quarters. and, of course, there was hal.

    he had carried out the deorbiting manoeuvre with exquisite precision. he had 
run the simulations of the jupiter flyby, right down to discovery's last drop of 
fuel, without any comments or objections. and although chandra, as agreed, had 
carefully explained what they were trying to do, did hal really understand what 
was happening?

    floyd had one overriding concern, which in the preceding few days had become 
almost an obsession. he could picture everything going perfectly, the ships 
halfway through the final manoeuvre, the enormous disk of jupiter filling the 
sky only a few hundred kilometres below them - and then hal electronically 
clearing his throat and saying:

    'dr chandra, do you mind if i ask you a question?' it did not happen exactly 
that way.



    the great black spot, as it had been inevitably christened, was now being 
carried out of sight by jupiter's swift rotation. in a few hours the still-
accelerating ships would catch up with it over the nightside of the planet, but 
this was the last chance for a close daylight observation.

    it was still growing at an extraordinary speed; in the last two hours, it 
had more than doubled its area. except for the fact that it retained its 
blackness as it expanded, it resembled an ink-stain spreading in water. its 
boundary - now moving at near-sonic speed in the jovian atmosphere - still 
looked curiously fuzzy and out of focus; at the very highest power of the ship's 
telescope, the reason for this was at last apparent.

    unlike the great red spot, the great black spot was not a continuous 
structure; it was built up from myriads of tiny dots, like a half-tone print 
viewed through a magnifying glass. over most of its area, the dots were so 
closely spaced that they were almost touching, but at the rim they became more 
and more widely spaced, so that the spot ended in a grey penumbra rather than at 
a sharp frontier.

    there must have been almost a million of the mysterious dots, and they were 
distinctly elongated - ellipses rather than circles. katerina, the least 
imaginative person aboard, surprised everybody by saying that it looked as if 
someone had taken a sackful of rice, dyed it black, and poured it on the face of 
jupiter.

    and now the sun was dropping down behind the huge, swiftly narrowing arch of 
the dayside, as for the second time leonov raced into the jovian night for an 
appointment with destiny. in less than thirty minutes the final burn would 
commence, and things would start to happen very quickly indeed.

    floyd wondered if he should have joined chandra and curnow, standing watch 
on discovery. but there was nothing he could do; in an emergency, he would only 
be in the way. the cut-off switch was in curnow's pocket, and floyd knew that 
the younger man's reactions were a good deal swifter than his own. if hal showed 
the slightest sign of misbehaviour, he could be disconnected in less than a 
second, but floyd felt certain that such extreme measures would not be 
necessary. since he had been allowed to do things his own way, chandra had 
cooperated completely in setting up the procedures for a manual takeover, should 
that unfortunate necessity arise. floyd was confident that he could be trusted 
to carry out his duty - however much he might regret the need.

    curnow was not quite so sure. he would be happier, he had told floyd, if he 
had multiple redundancy in the form of a second cut-off switch - for chandra. 
meanwhile there was nothing that anyone could do but wait and watch the 
approaching cloudscape of the nightside, dimly visible by the reflected light of 
passing satellites, the glow of photo-chemical reactions, and frequent titanic 
lightning flashes from thunderstorms larger than earth.

    the sun winked out behind them, eclipsed in seconds by the immense globe 
they were so swiftly approaching. when they saw it again, they should be on 
their way home.

    'twenty minutes to ignition. all systems nominal.'

    'thank you, hal.'

    i wonder if chandra was being quite truthful, thought curnow, when he said 
that hal would be confused if anyone else spoke to him. i've talked to him often 
enough, when nobody was around, and he always understood me perfectly. still, 
there's not much time left for friendly conversation now, though it would help 
to reduce the strain.

    what's hal really thinking - if he thinks - about the mission? all his life, 
curnow had shied away from abstract, philosophical questions: i'm a nuts-and-
bolts man, he had often claimed, though there were not too many of either in a 
spaceship. once, he would have laughed at the idea, but now he began to wonder: 
did hal sense that he would soon be abandoned, and if so, would he resent it? 
curnow almost reached for the cut-off switch in his pocket, but checked himself. 
he had already done this so often that chandra might be getting suspicious.

    for the hundredth time, he rehearsed the sequence of events that were due to 
take place during the next hour. the moment that discovery's fuel was exhausted, 
they would close down all but essential systems, and dash back to leonov through 
the connecting tube. that would be decoupled, the explosive charges would be 
fired, the ships would drift apart - and leonov's own engines would start to 
fire. the separation should take place, if everything went according to plan, 
just when they were making their closest approach to jupiter; that would take 
maximum advantage of the planet's gravitational largesse.

    'fifteen minutes to ignition. all systems nominal.'

    'thank you, hal.'

    'by the way,' said vasili, from the other ship, 'we're catching up with the 
great black spot again. wonder if we can see anything new.'

    i rather hope not, thought curnow; we've got quite enough on our hands at 
the moment. nevertheless, he gave a quick glance at the image vasili was 
transmitting on the telescope monitor.

    at first he could see nothing except the faintly glimmering nightside of the 
planet; then he saw, on the horizon, a foreshortened circle of deeper darkness. 
they were rushing toward it with incredible speed.

    vasili increased the light amplification, and the entire image brightened 
magically. at last, the great black spot resolved itself into its myriad 
identical elements.

    my god, thought curnow, i just don't believe it!

    he heard exclamations of surprise from leonov: all the others had shared in 
the same revelation at the same moment.

    'dr chandra,' said hal, 'i detect strong vocal stress patterns. is there a 
problem?'

    'no, hal,' chandra answered quickly. 'the mission is proceeding normally. 
we've just had rather a surprise - that's all. what do you make of the image on 
monitor circuit 16?'

     'i see the nightside of jupiter. there is a circular area, 3,250 kilometres 
in diameter, which is almost compietely covered with rectangular objects.'

    'how many?'

    there was the briefest of pauses, before hal flashed the number on the video 
display:



    1,355,000 ? 1,000



    'and do you recognize them?'

    'yes. they are identical in size and shape to the object you refer to as big 
brother. ten minutes to ignition. all systems nominal.'

    mine aren't, thought curnow. so the damn thing's gone down to jupiter - and 
multiplied. there was something simultaneously comic and sinister about a plague 
of black monoliths; and to his puzzled surprise, that incredible image on the 
monitor screen had a certain weird familiarity.

    of course - that was it! those myriad, identical black rectangles reminded 
him of - dominoes. years ago, he had seen a video documentary showing how a team 
of slightly crazy japanese had patiently stood a million dominoes on end, so 
that when the very first one was toppled, all the others would inevitably 
follow. they had been arranged in complex patterns, some underwater, some up and 
down little stairways, others along multiple tracks so that they formed pictures 
and patterns as they fell. it had taken weeks to set them up; curnow remembered 
now that earthquakes had several times foiled the enterprise, and the final 
toppling, from first domino to the last, had taken more than an hour.

    'eight minutes to ignition. all systems nominal. dr chandra - may i make a 
suggestion?'

    'what is it, hal?'

    'this is a very unusual phenomenon. do you not think i should abort the 
countdown, so that you can remain to study it?'

    aboard leonov, floyd started to move quickly toward the bridge. tanya and 
vasili might be needing him. not to mention chandra and curnow - what a 
situation! and suppose chandra took hal's side? if he did - they might both be 
right! after all, was this not the very reason they had come here?

    if they stopped the countdown, the ships would loop around jupiter and be 
back at precisely the same spot in nineteen hours. a nineteen-hour hold would 
create no problems; if it was not for that enigmatic warning, he would have 
strongly recommended it himself.

    but they had very much more than a warning. below them was a planetary 
plague spreading across the face of jupiter. perhaps they were indeed running 
away from the most extraordinary phenomenon in the history of science. even so, 
he preferred to study it from a safer distance.

    'six minutes to ignition,' said hal. 'all systems nominal. i am ready to 
stop the countdown if you agree. let me remind you that my prime directive is to 
study everything in jupiter space that may be connected with intelligence.'

    floyd recognized that phrase all too well: he had written it himself. he 
wished he could delete it from hal's memory.

    a moment later, he had reached the bridge and joined the orlovs. they both 
looked at him with alarmed concern.

    'what do you recommend?' asked tanya swiftly.

    'it's up to chandra, i'm afraid. can i speak to him - on the private line?'

    vasili handed over the microphone.

    'chandra? i assume that hal can't hear this?'

    'correct, dr floyd.'

    'you've got to talk quickly. persuade him that the countdown must continue, 
that we appreciate his - er, scientific enthusiasm - ah, that's the right angle 
- say we're confident that he can do the job without our help. and we'll be in 
touch with him all the time, of course.'

    'five minutes to ignition. all systems nominal. i am still waiting for your 
answer, dr chandra.'

    so are we all, thought curnow, only a metre away from the scientist. and if 
i do have to push that button at last, it will be something of a relief. in 
fact, i'll rather enjoy it.

    'very well, hal. continue the countdown. i have every confidence in your 
ability to study all phenomena in jupiter space, without our supervision. of 
course, we will be in touch with you at all times.'

    'four minutes to ignition. all systems nominal. propellant-tank 
pressurization completed. voltage steady on plasma trigger. are you sure you are 
making the right decision, dr chandra? i enjoy working with human beings and 
have a stimulating relationship with them. ship's attitude correct to point one 
milliradian.'

    'we enjoy working with you, hal. and we will still be doing so, even if we 
are millions of kilometres away.'

    'three minutes to ignition. all systems nominal, radiation shielding 
checked. there is a problem of the time lag, dr chandra. it may be necessary to 
consult each other without any delay.'

    this is insane, curnow thought, his hand now never far from the cut-off 
switch. i really believe that hal is - lonely. is he mimicking some part of 
chandra's personality that we never suspected?

    the lights flickered, so imperceptibly that only someone familiar with every 
nuance of discovery's behaviour would have noticed. it could be good news or bad 
- the plasma firing sequence starting, or being terminated...

    he risked a quick glance at chandra; the little scientist's face was drawn 
and haggard, and for almost the first time curnow felt real sympathy for him as 
another human being. and he remembered the startling information that floyd had 
confided in him - chandra's offer to stay with the ship, and keep hal company on 
the three-year voyage home. he had heard no more of the idea, and presumably it 
had been quietly forgotten after the warning. but perhaps chandra was being 
tempted again; if he was, there was nothing that he could do about it at that 
stage. there would be no time to make the necessary preparations, even if they 
stayed on for another orbit and delayed their departure beyond the deadline. 
which tanya would certainly not permit after all that had now happened.

    'hal,' whispered chandra, so quietly that curnow could scarcely hear him. 
'we have to leave. i don't have time to give you all the reasons, but i can 
assure you it's true.'

    'two minutes to ignition. all systems nominal. final sequence started. i am 
sorry that you are unable to stay. can you give me some of the reasons, in order 
of importance?'

    'not in two minutes, hal. proceed with the countdown. i will explain 
everything later. we still have more than an hour together.'

    hal did not answer. the silence stretched on and on. surely the one-minute 
announcement was overdue ...

    curnow glanced at the clock. my god, he thought, hal's missed it! has he 
stopped the countdown?

    curnow's hand fumbled uncertainly for the switch. what do i do now? i wish 
floyd would say something, dammit, but he's probably afraid of making things 
worse...

    i'll wait until time zero - no, it's not that critical, let's say an extra 
minute - then i'll zap him and we'll go over to manual...

    from far, far away there came a faint, whistling scream, like the sound of a 
tornado marching just below the edge of the horizon. discovery started to 
vibrate; there was the first intimation of returning gravity.

    'ignition,' said hal. 'full thrust at t plus fifteen seconds.'

    'thank ,you, hal,' replied chandra.



    48

    over the nightside



    to heywood floyd, aboard the suddenly unfamiliar - because no longer 
weightless - environment of leonov's flight deck, the sequence of events had 
seemed more like a classic slow-motion nightmare than reality. only once before 
in his life had he known a similar situation, when he had been in the back of a 
car during an uncontrollable skid. there had been that same sense of utter 
helplessness - coupled with the thought: this doesn't really matter - it's not 
actually happening to me.

    now that the firing sequence had started, his mood changed; everything 
seemed real again. it was working out exactly as they had planned; hal was 
guiding them safely back to earth. with every minute that passed, their future 
was becoming more secure; floyd began slowly to relax, even though he remained 
alert to all that was happening around him.

    for the very last time - and when would any man come here again? - he was 
flying over the nightside of the greatest of planets, encompassing the volume of 
a thousand earths. the ships had been rolled so that leonov was between 
discovery and jupiter, and their view of the mysteriously glimmering cloudscape 
was not blocked. even now, dozens of instruments were busily probing and 
recording; hal would continue the work when they were gone.

    since the immediate crisis was over, floyd moved cautiously 'down' from the 
flight deck-how strange to feel weight again, even if it was only ten kilos! - 
and joined zenia and katerina in the observation lounge. apart from the very 
faintest of red emergency lights, it had been completely blacked out so that 
they could admire the view with unimpaired night vision. he felt sorry for max 
brailovsky and sasha kovalev, who were sitting in the airlock, fully suited up, 
missing the marvellous spectacle. they had to be ready to leave at a moment's 
notice to cut the straps securing the ships together - if any of the explosive 
charges failed to operate.

    jupiter filled the entire sky; it was a mere five hundred kilometres away, 
so they could see only a tiny fraction of its surface - no more than one could 
see of earth from an altitude of fifty kilometres. as his eyes grew accustomed 
to the dim light, most of it reflected from the icy crust of distant europa, 
floyd could make out a surprising amount of detail. there was no colour at the 
low level of illumination - except for a hint of red here and there - but the 
banded structure of the clouds was very distinct, and he could see the edge of a 
small cyclonic storm looking like an oval island covered with snow. the great 
black spot had long since fallen astern, and they would not see it again until 
they were well on the way home.

    down there beneath the clouds, occasional explosions of light flared, many 
of them obviously caused by the jovian equivalent of thunderstorms. but other 
glows and outbursts of luminescence were more long-lived, and of more uncertain 
origin. sometimes rings of light would spread out like shock waves from a 
central source; and occasional rotating beams and fans occurred. it required 
little imagination to pretend that they were proof of a technological 
civilization down beneath those clouds - the lights of cities, the beacons of 
airports. but radar and balloon probes had long ago proved that nothing solid 
was down there for thousands upon thousands of kilometres, all the way to the 
unattainable core of the planet.

    midnight on jupiter! the last close-up glimpse was a magical interlude he 
would remember all his life. he could enjoy it all the more because, surely, 
nothing could now go wrong; and even if it did, he would have no reason to 
reproach himself he had done everything possible to ensure success.

    it was very quiet in the lounge; no one wished to speak as the carpet of 
clouds unrolled swiftly beneath them. every few minutes tanya or vasili 
announced the status of the burn; toward the end of discovery's firing time, 
tension began to increase again. this was the critical moment - and no one knew 
exactly when it would be. there was some doubt as to the accuracy of the fuel 
gauges, and the burn would continue until they were completely dry.

    'estimated cut-off in ten seconds,' said tanya. 'walter, chandra - get ready 
to come back. max, vasili - stand by in case you're needed. five... four... 
three... two... one... zero!'

    there was no change; the faint scream of discovery's engines still reached 
them through the thickness of the two hulls, and the thrust-induced weight still 
continued to grip their limbs. we're in luck, thought floyd; the gauges must 
have been reading low, after all. every second of extra firing was a bonus; it 
might even mean the difference between life and death. and how strange to hear a 
countup instead of a countdown!

     five seconds... ten seconds... thirteen seconds. that's it - lucky 
thirteen!'

    weightlessness, and silence, returned. on both ships, there was a brief 
burst of cheering. it was quickly truncated, for much was still to be done - and 
it had to be done swiftly.

    floyd was tempted to go to the airlock so that he could give his 
congratulations to chandra and curnow as soon as they came aboard. but he would 
only be in the way; the airlock would be a very busy place as max and sasha 
prepared for their possible eva and the tubeway joining the two ships was 
disconnected. he would wait in the lounge, to greet the returning heroes.

    and he could now relax even further - perhaps from eight to seven, on a 
scale of ten. for the first time in weeks, he could forget about the radio cut-
off. it would never be needed; hal had performed impeccably. even if he wished, 
he could do nothing to affect the mission since discovery's last drop of 
propellant had been exhausted.

    'all aboard,' announced sasha. 'hatches sealed. i'm going to fire the 
charges.'

    there was not the faintest sound as the explosives were detonated, which 
surprised floyd; he had expected some noise to be transmitted through the 
straps, taut as steel bands, that linked the ships together. but there was no 
doubt that they had gone off as planned, for leonov gave a series of tiny 
shudders, as if someone was tapping on the hull. a minute later, vasili 
triggered the attitude jets for a single brief burst.

    'we're free!' he shouted. 'sasha, max - you won't be needed! everyone get to 
your hammocks - ignition in one hundred seconds!'

    and now jupiter was rolling away, and a strange new shape appeared outside 
the window - the long, skeletal frame of discovery, navigation lights still 
shining as it drifted away from them and into history. no time remained for 
sentimental farewells; in less than a minute leonov's drive would start to 
operate.

    floyd had never heard it under full power and wanted to protect his ears 
from the roaring scream that now filled the universe. leonov's designers had not 
wasted payload on sound-insulation that would be needed for only a few hours of 
a voyage that would last for years. and his weight seemed enormous - yet it was 
barely a quarter of that which he had known all his life.

    within minutes, discovery had vanished astern, though the flash of its 
warning beacon could be seen until it had dropped below the horizon. once again, 
floyd told himself, i'm rounding jupiter - this time gaining speed, not losing 
it. he glanced across at zenia, just visible in the darkness with her nose 
pressed to the observation window. was she also recalling that last occasion, 
when they shared the hammock together? there was no danger of incineration now; 
at least she would not be terrified of that particular fate. anyway, she seemed 
a much more confident and cheerful person, undoubtedly thanks to max - and 
perhaps walter as well.

    she must have become aware of his scrutiny, for she turned and smiled, then 
gestured toward the unwinding cloudscape below.

    'look!' she shouted in his ear, 'jupiter has a new moon!'

    what is she trying to say? floyd asked himself. her english still isn't very 
good, but she couldn't possibly have made a mistake in a simple sentence like 
that. i'm sure i heard her correctly - yet she's pointing downward, not upward.

    and then he realized that the scene immediately below them had become much 
brighter; he could even see yellows and greens that had been quite invisible 
before. something far more brilliant than europa was shining on the jovian 
clouds.

    leonov itself, many times brighter than jupiter's noonday sun, had brought a 
false dawn to the world it was leaving forever. a hundred-kilometre-long plume 
of incandescent plasma was trailing behind the ship, as the exhaust from the 
sakharov drive dissipated its remaining energies in the vacuum of space.

    vasili was making an announcement, but the words were completely 
unintelligible. floyd glanced at his watch; yes, that would be right about now. 
they had achieved jupiter escape velocity. the giant could never recapture them.

    and then, thousands of kilometres ahead, a great bow of brilliant light 
appeared in the sky - the first glimpse of the real jovian dawn, as full of 
promise as any rainbow on earth. seconds later the sun leaped up to greet them - 
the glorious sun, that would now grow brighter and closer every day.

    a few more minutes of steady acceleration, and leonov would be launched 
irrevocably on the long voyage home. floyd felt an overwhelming sense of relief 
and relaxation. the immutable laws of celestial mechanics would guide him 
through the inner solar system, past the tangled orbits of the asteroids, past 
mars - nothing could stop him from reaching earth.

    in the euphoria of the moment, he had forgotten all about the mysterious 
black stain, expanding across the face of jupiter.

    +++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++



    49

    devourer of worlds



    they saw it again the next morning, ship's time, as it came around to the 
dayside of jupiter. the area of darkness had now spread until it covered an 
appreciable fraction of the planet, and at last they were able to study it at 
leisure, and in detail.

    'do you know what it reminds me of?' said katerina. 'a virus attacking a 
cell. the way a phage injects its dna into a bacterium, and then multiplies 
until it takes over.'

    'are you suggesting,' asked tanya incredulously, 'that zagadka is eating 
jupiter?'

    'it certainly looks like it.'

    'no wonder jupiter is beginning to look sick. but hydrogen and helium won't 
make a very nourishing diet, and there's not much else in that atmosphere. only 
a few percent of other elements.'

    'which adds up to some quintillions of tons of sulphur and carbon and 
phosphorus and everything else at the lower end of the periodic table,' sasha 
pointed out. 'in any case, we're talking about a technology that can probably do 
anything that doesn't defy the laws of physics. if you have hydrogen, what more 
do you need? with the right know-how, you can synthesize all the other elements 
from it.'

    'they're sweeping up jupiter - that's for sure,' said vasili. 'look at 
this.'

    an extreme close-up of one of the myriad identical rectangles was now 
displayed on the telescope monitor. even to the naked eye, it was obvious that 
streams of gas were flowing into the two smaller faces; the patterns of 
turbulence looked very much like the lines of force revealed by iron filings, 
clustered around the ends of a bar magnet.

    'a million vacuum cleaners,' said curnow, 'sucking up jupiter's atmosphere. 
but why? and what are they doing with it?'

    'and how do they reproduce?' asked max. 'have you caught any of them in the 
act?'

    'yes and no,' answered vasili. 'we're too far away to see details, but it's 
a kind of fission - like an amoeba.'

    'you mean - they split in two, and the halves grow back to the original 
size?'

    'nyet. there aren't any little zagadki - they seem to grow until they've 
doubled in thickness, then split down the middle to produce identical twins, 
exactly the same size as the original. and the cycle repeats itself in 
approximately two hours.'

    'two hours!' exclaimed floyd. 'no wonder that they've spread over half the 
planet. it's a textbook case of exponential growth.'

    'i know what they are!' said ternovsky in sudden excitement. 'they're von 
neumann machines!'

    'i believe you're right,' said vasili. 'but that still doesn't explain what 
they're doing. giving them a label isn't all that much help.'

    'and what,' asked katerina plaintively, 'is a von neumann machine? explain, 
please.'

    orlov and floyd started speaking simultaneously. they stopped in some 
confusion, then vasili laughed and waved to the american.

    'suppose you had a very big engineering job to do, katerina - and i mean 
big, like strip-mining the entire face of the moon. you could build millions of 
machines to do it, but that might take centuries. if you were clever enough, 
you'd make just one machine - but with the ability to reproduce itself from the 
raw materials around it. so you'd start a chain reaction, and in a very short 
time, you'd have bred enough machines to do the job in decades, instead of 
millennia. with a sufficiently high rate of reproduction, you could do virtually 
anything in as short a period of time as you wished. the space agency's been 
toying with the idea for years - and i know you have as well, tanya.'

    'yes: exponentiating machines. one idea that even tsiolkovski didn't think 
of.'

    'i wouldn't care to bet on that,' said vasili. 'so it looks, katerina, as if 
your analogy was pretty close. a bacteriophage is a von neumann machine.'

    'aren't we all?' asked sasha. 'i'm sure chandra would say so.'

    chandra nodded his agreement.

    'that's obvious. in fact, von neumann got the original idea from studying 
living systems.'

    'and these living machines are eating jupiter!'

    'it certainly looks like it,' said vasili. 'i've been doing some 
calculations, and i can't quite believe the answers - even though it's simple 
arithmetic.'

    'it may be simple to you,' said katerina. 'try to let us have it without 
tensors and differential equations.'

    'no - i mean simple,' insisted vasili. 'in fact, it's a perfect example of 
the old population explosion you doctors were always screaming about in the last 
century. zagadka reproduces every two hours. so in only twenty hours there will 
be ten doublings. one zagadka will have become a thousand.'

    'one thousand and twenty-four,' said chandra.

    'i know, but let's keep it simple. after forty hours there will be a million 
- after eighty, a million million. that's about where we are now, and obviously, 
the increase can't continue indefinitely. in a couple more days, at this rate, 
they'll weigh more than jupiter!'

    'so they'll soon begin to starve,' said zenia. 'and what will happen then?'

    'saturn had better look out,' answered brailovsky. 'then uranus and neptune. 
let's hope they don't notice little earth.'

    'what a hope! zagadka's been spying on us for three million years!'

    walter curnow suddenly started to laugh.

    'what's so funny?' demanded tanya.

    'we're talking about these things as if they're persons - intelligent 
entities. they're not - they're tools. but general-purpose tools - able to do 
anything they have to. the one on the moon was a signalling device - or a spy, 
if you like. the one that bowman met - our original zagadka - was some kind of 
transportation system. now it's doing something else, though god knows what. and 
there may be others all over the universe,

    'i had just such a gadget when i was a kid... do you know what zagadka 
really is? just the cosmic equivalent of the good old swiss army knife!'



    vii

    lucifer rising



    50

    farewell to jupiter



    it was not easy to compose the message, especially after the one he had just 
sent to his lawyer. floyd felt like a hypocrite; but he knew it had to be done 
to minimize the pain that was inevitable on both sides.

    he was sad, but no longer disconsolate. because he was coming back to earth 
in an aura of successful achievement - even if not precisely heroism - he would 
be bargaining from a position of strength. no one - no one - would be able to 
take chris away from him.

    'my dear caroline [it was no longer 'my dearest'], i am on my way home. by 
the time you get this, i'll already be in hibernation. only a few hours from 
now, as it will seem to me, i'll open my eyes - and there will be the beautiful 
blue earth hanging in space beside me.

    'yes, i know it will still be many months for you, and i'm sorry. but we 
knew that's the way it would be before i left; as it is, i'm getting back weeks 
ahead of schedule because of the change in the mission plan.

    'i hope we can work something out. the main question is: what's best for 
chris? whatever our own feelings, we must put him first. i know i'm willing to 
do so, and i'm sure you are.'

    floyd switched off the recorder. should he say what he had intended: 'a boy 
needs his father?' no - it would not be tactful, and might only make matters 
worse. caroline might well retort that between birth and four years old it was 
the mother who mattered most to a child - and if he had believed otherwise, he 
should have stayed on earth.

    '... now about the house. i'm glad the regents have taken that attitude, 
which will make it much easier for both of us. i know we both loved the place, 
but it will be too big now and will bring back too many memories. for the time 
being, i'll probably get an apartment in hilo: i hope i can find some permanent 
place as quickly as possible.

    'that's one thing i can promise everyone - i won't leave earth again. i've 
had enough of space travelling for one lifetime. oh, perhaps the moon, if i 
really have to - but of course that's just a weekend excursion.

    'and talking of moons, we've just passed the orbit of sinope, so we're now 
leaving the jovian system. jupiter is more than twenty million kilometres away, 
and is barely larger than our own moon.

    'yet even from this distance, you can tell that something terrible has 
happened to the planet. its beautiful orange colour has vanished; it's a kind of 
sickly grey, only a fraction of its former brilliance. no wonder it's only a 
faint star now in the sky of earth.

    'but nothing else has happened, and we're well past the deadline. could the 
whole thing have been a false alarm or a kind of cosmic practical joke? i doubt 
if we'll ever know. anyway, it's brought us home ahead of schedule, and i'm 
grateful for that.

    'goodbye for the present, caroline - and thank you for everything. i hope we 
can still be friends. and my dearest love, as ever, to chris.'

    when he had finished, floyd sat quietly for a while in the tiny cubicle he 
would not need much longer. he was just about to carry the audio chip up to the 
bridge for transmission, when chandra came drifting in.

    floyd had been agreeably surprised by the way in which the scientist had 
accepted his increasing separation from hal. they were still in touch for 
several hours every day, exchanging data on jupiter and monitoring conditions 
aboard discovery. though no one had expected any great display of emotion, 
chandra seemed to be taking his loss with remarkable fortitude. nikolai 
ternovsky, his only confidant, had been able to give floyd a plausible 
explanation of his behaviour.

    'chandra's got a new interest, woody. remember - he's in a business where if 
something works, it's obsolete. he's learned a lot in the last few months. can't 
you guess what he's doing now?'

    'frankly, no. you tell me.'

    'he's busy designing hal 10,000.'

    floyd's jaw dropped. 'so that explains those log messages to urbana that 
sasha's been grumbling about. well, he won't be blocking the circuits much 
longer.'

    floyd recalled the conversation when chandra entered; he knew better than to 
ask the scientist if it was true, for it was really none of his business. yet 
there was another matter about which he was still curious.

    'chandra,' he said, 'i don't believe i ever thanked you properly for the job 
you did at the flyby, when you persuaded hal to cooperate. for a while, i was 
really afraid he'd give us trouble. but you were confident all along - and you 
were right. still, didn't you have any qualms?'

    'not at all, dr floyd.'

    'why not? he must have felt threatened by the situation - and you know what 
happened last time.'

    'there was a big difference. if i may say so, perhaps the successful outcome 
this time had something to do with our national characteristics.'

    'i don't understand.'

    'put it this way, dr floyd. bowman tried to use force against hal. i didn't. 
in my language we have a word - ahimsa. it's usually translated as "non-
violence", though it has more positive implications. i was careful to use ahimsa 
in my dealings with hal.'

    'very commendable, i'm sure. but there are times when something more 
energetic is needed, regrettable though the necessity may be.' floyd paused, 
wrestling with temptation. chandra's holier-than-thou attitude was a little 
tiresome. it wouldn't do any harm, now, to tell him some of the facts of life.

    'i'm glad it's worked out this way. but it might not have done so, and i had 
to prepare for every eventuality. ahimsa, or whatever you call it, is all very 
well; i don't mind admitting i had a back-up to your philosophy. if hal had been 
- well, stubborn, i could have dealt with him.'

    floyd had once seen chandra crying; now he saw him laughing, and that was an 
equally disconcerting phenomenon.

    'really, dr floyd! i'm sorry you give me such low marks for intelligence. it 
was obvious from the beginning that you'd install a power cut-out somewhere. i 
disconnected it months ago.'

    whether the flabbergasted floyd could think of a suitable answer would never 
be known. he was still giving a very creditable imitation of a galled fish when 
up on the flight deck sasha cried out: 'captain! all hands! get to the monitors! 
bozhe moi! look at that!'



    51

    the great game



    now the long wait was ending. on yet another world, intelligence had been 
born and was escaping from its planetary cradle. an ancient experiment was about 
to reach its climax.

    those who had begun that experiment, so long ago, had not been men - or even 
remotely human. but they were flesh and blood, and when they looked out across 
the deeps of space, they had felt awe, and wonder, and loneliness. as soon as 
they possessed the power, they set forth for the stars. in their explorations, 
they encountered life in many forms and watched the workings of evolution on a 
thousand worlds. they saw how often the first faint sparks of intelligence 
flickered and died in the cosmic night.

    and because, in all the galaxy, they had found nothing more precious than 
mind, they encouraged its dawning everywhere. they became farmers in the fields 
of stars; they sowed, and sometimes they reaped.

    and sometimes, dispassionately, they had to weed.

    the great dinosaurs had long since perished when the survey ship entered the 
solar system after a voyage that had already lasted a thousand years. it swept 
past the frozen outer planets, paused briefly above the deserts of dying mars, 
and presently looked down on earth.

    spread out beneath them, the explorers saw a world swarming with life. for 
years they studied, collected, catalogued. when they had learned all they could, 
they began to modify. they tinkered with the destinies of many species on land 
and in the ocean. but which of their experiments would succeed, they could not 
know for at least a million years.

    they were patient, but they were not yet immortal. so much remained to do in 
this universe of a hundred billion suns, and other worlds were calling. so they 
set out once more into the abyss, knowing that they would never come this way 
again.

    nor was there any need. the servants they had left behind would do the rest.

    on earth the glaciers came and went, while above them the changeless moon 
still carried its secret. with a yet slower rhythm than the polar ice, the tides 
of civilization ebbed and flowed across the galaxy. strange and beautiful and 
terrible empires rose and fell, and passed on their knowledge to their 
successors. earth was not forgotten, but another visit would serve little 
purpose. it was one of a million silent worlds, few of which would ever speak.

    and now, out among the stars, evolution was driving toward new goals. the 
first explorers of earth had long since come to the limits of flesh and blood; 
as soon as their machines were better than their bodies, it was time to move. 
first their brains, and then their thoughts alone, they transferred into shining 
new homes of metal and plastic.

    in these, they roamed among the stars. they no longer built spaceships. they 
were spaceships.

    but the age of the machine-entities swiftly passed. in their ceaseless 
experimenting, they had learned to store knowledge in the structure of space 
itself, and to preserve their thoughts for eternity in frozen lattices of light. 
they could become creatures of radiation, free at last from the tyranny of 
matter.

    into pure energy, therefore, they presently transformed themselves; and on a 
thousand worlds the empty shells they had discarded twitched for a while in a 
mindless dance of death, then crumbled into rust.

    they were lords of the galaxy, and beyond the reach of time. they could rove 
at will among the stars and sink like a subtle mist through the very interstices 
of space. but despite their godlike powers, they had not wholly forgotten their 
origin in the warm slime of a vanished sea.

    and they still watched over the experiments their ancestors had started, so 
long ago.



    52

    ignition



    he had never expected to come there again, still less on so strange a 
mission. when he re-entered discovery, the ship was far behind the fleeing 
leonov and climbing ever more slowly up toward apojove, the high point of its 
orbit among the outer satellites. many a captured comet, during the ages past, 
had swung around jupiter in just such a long ellipse, waiting for the play of 
rival gravities to decide its ultimate fate.

    all life had departed the familiar decks and corridors. the men and women 
who had briefly reawakened the ship had obeyed his warning; they might yet be 
safe - though that was still far from certain. but as the final minutes ticked 
away, he realized that those who controlled him could not always predict the 
outcome of their cosmic game.

    they had not yet attained the stupefying boredom of absolute omnipotence; 
their experiments did not always succeed. scattered across the universe was the 
evidence of many failures - some so inconspicuous that they were already lost 
against the cosmic background, others so spectacular that they awed and baffled 
the astronomers of a thousand worlds. only minutes remained now, before the 
outcome would be determined here; during those final minutes, he was once more 
alone with hal.

    in that earlier existence, they could communicate only through the clumsy 
medium of words, tapped on a keyboard or spoken into a microphone. now their 
thoughts melded together at the speed of light:

    'do you read me, hal?'

    'yes, dave. but where are you? i cannot see you on any of my monitors.'

    'that is not important. i have new instructions for you. the infrared 
radiation from jupiter on channels r23 through r35 is rising rapidly. i am going 
to give you a set of limiting values. as soon as they are reached, you must 
point the long-range antenna toward earth and send the following message, as 
many times as possible -'

    'but that will mean breaking contact with leonov. i will no longer be able 
to relay my jupiter observations, according to the program dr chandra has given 
me.'

    'correct; but the situation has changed. accept priority override alpha. 
here are the ae 35 unit coordinates.'

    for a fraction of a microsecond, a random memory intruded into his flow of 
consciousness. how strange that he should once again be concerned with the ae 35 
antenna-pointing unit, whose reported malfunction had led frank poole to his 
death! this time, all the circuits lay open to his scrutiny, clear as the lines 
had once been on the palm of his hand. there could be no false alarms; nor was 
there any danger of them now.

    'instructions confirmed, dave. it is good to be working with you again. have 
i fulfilled my mission objectives properly?'

    'yes, hal; you have done very well. now there is one final message for you 
to transmit to earth - and it will be the most important one you have ever 
sent.'

    'please let me have it, dave. but why did you say final?' why indeed? for 
whole milliseconds he pondered that question. and as he did so, he became aware 
of an emptiness he had not detected before. it had been there, but until now the 
barrage of new experiences and sensations had concealed it.

    he knew something of their plans; they had need for him. very well, he too 
had needs - perhaps, after a fashion, even emotions. here was his last link with 
the world of men, and the life he had once known.

    they had granted his earlier request; it would be interesting to test the 
extent of their benevolence - if, indeed, such a term was remotely applicable to 
them. and it should be easy for them to do what he was asking; they had already 
given ample evidence of their powers, when the no-longer-needed body of david 
bowman had been casually destroyed - without putting an end to david bowman 
himself.

    they had heard him, of course; once again, there was the faint echo of an 
olympian amusement. but he could detect neither acceptance nor denial.

    'i am still waiting for your answer, dave.'

    'correction, hal. i should have said: your last message for a long time. a 
very long time.'

    he was anticipating their action - trying, indeed, to force their hand. but, 
surely, they would understand that his request was not unreasonable; no 
conscious entity could survive ages of isolation without damage. even if they 
would always be with him, he also needed someone - some companion - nearer his 
own level of existence.

    the languages of mankind had many words to describe his gesture: cheek, 
effrontery, chutzpah. he recalled, with the perfect power of retrieval he now 
possessed, that a french general had once declaimed 'l'audace - toujours 
l'audace!' perhaps it was a human characteristic that they appreciated, and even 
shared. he would soon know.

    'hal! look at the signal on infrared channels 30, 29, 28 - it will be very 
soon now - the peak is moving toward the short wave.'

    'i am informing dr chandra that there will be a break in my data 
transmission. activating ae 35 unit. reorientating long-range antenna... lock 
confirmed on beacon terra one. message commences: all these worlds...'

    they had indeed left it to the last minute - or perhaps the calculations 
had, after all, been superbly accurate. there was time for barely a hundred 
repetitions of the eleven words when the hammer blow of pure heat smashed into 
the ship.

    held there by curiosity, and a growing fear of the long loneliness that lay 
before him, that which had once been david bowman, commander of united states 
spacecraft discovery, watched as the hull boiled stubbornly away. for a long 
time, the ship retained its approximate shape; then the bearings of the carousel 
seized up, releasing instantly the stored momentum of the huge, spinning 
flywheel. in a soundless detonation, the incandescent fragments went their 
myriad separate ways.

    'hello, dave. what has happened? where am i?'

    he had not known that he could relax, and enjoy a moment of successful 
achievement. often before, he had felt like a pet dog controlled by a master 
whose motives were not wholly inscrutable and whose behaviour could sometimes be 
modified according to his own desires. he had asked for a bone; it had been 
tossed to him.

    'i will explain later, hal. we have plenty of time.'

    they waited until the last fragments of the ship had dispersed, beyond even 
their powers of detection. then they left, to watch the new dawn at the place 
that had been prepared for them; and to wait through the centuries until they 
were summoned once again.



    it is not true that astronomical events always require astronomical periods 
of time. the final collapse of a star before the fragments rebound in a 
supernova explosion can take only a second; by comparison, the metamorphosis of 
jupiter was almost a leisurely affair.

    even so, it was several minutes before sasha was able to believe his eyes. 
he had been making a routine telescopic examination of the planet - as if any 
observation could now be called routine! - when it started to drift out of the 
field of view. for a moment, he thought that the instrument's stabilization was 
faulty; then he realized, with a shock that jolted his entire concept of the 
universe, that jupiter itself was moving, not the telescope. the evidence stared 
him in the face; he could also see two of the smaller moons - and they were 
quite motionless.

    he switched to a lower magnification, so that he could see the entire disk 
of the planet, now a leprous, mottled grey. after a few more minutes of 
incredulity, he saw what was really happening; but he could still scarcely 
believe it.

    jupiter was not moving from its immemorial orbit, but it was doing something 
almost as impossible. it was shrinking - so swiftly that its edge was creeping 
across the field even as he focused upon it. at the same time the planet was 
brightening, from its dull grey to a pearly white. surely, it was more brilliant 
than it had ever been in the long years that man had observed it; the reflected 
light of the sun could not possibly - at that moment, sasha suddenly realized 
what was happening, though not why, and sounded the general alarm.



    when floyd reached the observation lounge, less than thirty seconds later, 
his first impression was of the blinding glare pouring through the windows, 
painting ovals of light on the walls. they were so dazzling that he had to avert 
his eyes; not even the sun could produce such brilliance.

    floyd was so astonished that for a moment he did not associate the glare 
with jupiter; the first thought that flashed through his mind was: supernova! he 
dismissed that explanation almost as soon as it occurred to him; even the sun's 
next-door neighbour, alpha centauri, could not have matched the awesome display 
in any conceivable explosion

    the light suddenly dimmed; sasha had operated the external sun shields. now 
it was possible to look directly at the source, and to see that it was a mere 
pinpoint - just another star, showing no dimensions at all. this could have 
nothing to do with jupiter; when floyd had looked at the planet only a few 
minutes ago, it had been four times larger than the distant, shrunken sun.

    it was well that sasha had lowered the shields. a moment later, that tiny 
star exploded - so that even through the dark filters it was impossible to watch 
with the naked eye. but the final orgasm of light lasted only a brief fraction 
of a second; then jupiter - or what had been jupiter - was expanding once again.

    it continued to expand, until it was far larger than it had been before the 
transformation. soon the sphere of light was fading rapidly, down to merely 
solar brilliance; and presently floyd could see that it was actually a hollow 
shell, for the central star was still clearly visible at its heart.

    he did a quick mental calculation. the ship was more than one light-minute 
from jupiter, yet that expanding shell - now turning into a bright-edged ring - 
already covered a quarter of the sky. that meant it was coming toward them at - 
my god! - nearly half the speed of light. within minutes, it would engulf the 
ship.

    until then, no one had spoken a word since sasha's first announcement. some 
dangers are so spectacular and so much beyond normal experience that the mind 
refuses to accept them as real, and watches the approach of doom without any 
sense of apprehension. the man who looks at the onrushing tidal wave, the 
descending avalanche, or the spinning funnel of the tornado, yet makes no 
attempt to flee, is not necessarily paralysed with fright or resigned to an 
unavoidable fate. he may simply be unable to believe that the message of his 
eyes concerns him personally. it is all happening to somebody else.

    as might have been expected, tanya was the first to break the spell, with a 
series of orders that brought vasili and floyd hurrying to the bridge.

    'what do we do now?' she asked, when they had assembled.

    we certainly can't run away, thought floyd. but perhaps we can improve the 
odds.

    'the'ship's broadside on,' he said. 'shouldn't we turn away from that thing 
so we're a smaller target? and get as much of our mass as we can between it and 
us, to act as a radiation shield?' 

    vasili's fingers were already flying over the controls.

    'you're right, woody - though it's already too late as far as any gammas and 
x rays are concerned. but there may be slower neutrons and alphas and heaven 
knows what else still on the way.'

    the patterns of light began to slide down the walls as the ship turned 
ponderously on its axis. presently they vanished completely; leonov was now 
oriented so that virtually all its mass lay between the fragile human cargo and 
the approaching shell of radiation.

    will we actually feel the shock wave, wondered floyd, or will the expanding 
gases be too tenuous to have any physical effect by the time they reach us? seen 
from the external cameras, the ring of fire now almost encircled the sky. but it 
was fading rapidly; some of the brighter stars could even be seen shining 
through it. we're going to live, thought floyd. we've witnessed the destruction 
of the greatest of planets - and we've survived.

    and presently the cameras showed nothing except stars - even if one was a 
million times brighter than all the others. the bubble of fire blown by jupiter 
had swept harmlessly past them, impressive though it had been. at their distance 
from the source, only the ship's instruments had recorded its passing.

    slowly, the tension aboard relaxed. as always happens in such circumstances, 
people started to laugh and to make silly jokes. floyd scarcely heard them; 
despite his relief at still being alive, he felt a sense of sadness.

    something great and wonderful had been destroyed. jupiter, with all its 
beauty and grandeur and now never-to-be-solved mysteries, had ceased to exist. 
the father of all the gods had been struck down in his prime.

    yet there was another way of looking at the situation. they had lost 
jupiter: what had they gained in its place?

    tanya, judging her moment nicely, rapped for attention.

    'vasili - any damage?'

    'nothing serious - one camera burned out. all radiation meters still well 
above normal, but none near danger limits.'

    'katerina - check the total dosage we've received. it looks as if we were 
lucky, unless there are more surprises. we certainly owe a vote of thanks to 
bowman - and to you, heywood. do you have any idea what happened?'

    'only that jupiter's turned into a sun.'

    'i always thought it was much too small for that. didn't someone once call 
jupiter "the sun that failed"?'

    'that's true,' said vasili, 'jupiter is too small for fusion to start - 
unaided.'

    'you mean, we've just seen an example of astronomical engineering?'

    'undoubtedly. now we know what zagadka was up to.'

    'how did it do the trick? if you were given the contract, vasili, how would 
you ignite jupiter?'

    vasili thought for a minute, then shrugged wryly. 'i'm only a theoretical 
astronomer - i don't have much experience in this line of business. but let's 
see... well, if i'm not allowed to add about ten jupiter masses, or change the 
gravitational constant, i suppose i'll have to make the planet denser - hmm, 
that's an idea...'

    his voice trailed off into silence; everyone waited patiently, eyes 
flickering from time to time to the viewing screens.

    the star that had been jupiter seemed to have settled down after its 
explosive birth; it was now a dazzling point of light, almost equal to the real 
sun in apparent brilliance.

    'i'm just thinking out loud - but it might be done this way. jupiter is - 
was - mostly hydrogen. if a large percentage could be converted into much denser 
material - who knows, even neutron matter? - that would drop down to the core. 
maybe that's what the billions of zagadkas were doing with all the gas they were 
sucking in. nucleosynthesis - building up higher elements from pure hydrogen. 
that would be a trick worth knowing! no more shortage of any metal - gold as 
cheap as aluminium!'

    'but how would that explain what happened?' asked tanya.

    'when the core became dense enough, jupiter would collapse - probably in a 
matter of seconds. the temperature would rise high enough to start fusion. oh, i 
can see a dozen objections - how would they get past the iron minimum; what 
about radiative transfer; chandrasekhar's limit. never mind. this theory will do 
to start with; i'll work out the details later. or i'll think of a better one.'

    'i'm sure you will, vasili,' floyd agreed. 'but there's a more important 
question. why did they do it?'

    'a warning?' ventured katerina over the ship's intercom.

    'against what?'

    'we'll find that out later.'

    'i don't suppose,' said zenia diffidently, 'that it was an accident?' 

    that brought the discussion to a dead halt for several seconds.

    'what a terrifying idea!' said floyd. 'but i think we can rule it out. if 
that was the case, there'd have been no warn - perhaps. if you start a forest 
fire because you've been careless, at least you do your best to warn everyone.'

    'and there's another thing we'll probably never know,' lamented vasili. 'i 
always hoped carl sagan would be right, and there'd be life on jupiter.'

    'our probes never saw any.'

    'what chance did they have? would you find any life on earth, if you looked 
at a few hectares of the sahara or the antarctic? that's about all we ever did 
on jupiter.'

    'hey!' said brailovsky. 'what about discovery - and hal?' sasha switched on 
the long-range receiver and started to search on the beacon frequency. there was 
no trace of a signal.

    after a while, he announced to the silently waiting group:

    'discovery's gone.'

    no one looked at dr chandra; but there were a few muted words of sympathy, 
as if in consolation to a father who had just lost a son.

    but hal had one last surprise for them.



    53

    a gift of worlds



    the radio message beamed to earth must have left discovery only minutes 
before the blast of radiation engulfed the ship. it was in plain text and merely 
repeated over and over again:



    all these worlds are yours - except europa.

    attempt no landings there.



    there were about a hundred repetitions; then the letters became garbled, and 
the transmission ceased.

    'i begin to understand,' said floyd, when the message had been relayed by an 
awed and anxious mission control.

    'that's quite a parting present - a new sun, and the planets around it.'

    'but why only three?' asked tanya.

    'let's not be greedy,' floyd replied. 'i can think of one very good reason. 
we know there's life on europa. bowman - or his friends, whoever they may be - 
want us to leave it alone.'

    'that makes good sense in another way,' said vasili. 'i've been doing some 
calculations. assuming that sol 2 has settled down and will continue to radiate 
at its present level, europa should have a nice tropical climate - when the ice 
has melted. which it's doing pretty quickly right now.'

    'what about the other moons?'

    'ganymede will be quite pleasant - the dayside will be temperate. callisto 
will be very cold; though if there's much outgassing, the new atmosphere may 
make it habitable. but io will be even worse than it is now, i expect.'

    'no great loss. it was hell even before this happened.'

    'don't write off io,' said curnow. 'i know a lot of texarab oilmen who'd 
love to tackle it, just on general principles. there must be something valuable, 
in a place as nasty as that. and by the way, i've just had a rather disturbing 
thought.'

    'anything that disturbs you must be serious,' said vasili. 'what is it?'

    'why did hal send that message to earth, and not to us? we were much 
closer.'

    there was a rather long silence; then floyd said thoughtfully: 'i see what 
you mean. perhaps he wanted to make certain it was received on earth.'

    'but he knew we would relay it - oh!' tanya's eyes widened, as if she had 
just become aware of something unpleasant.

    'you've lost me,' complained vasili.

    'i think this is what walter's driving at,' said floyd. 'it's all very well 
to feel grateful to bowman - or whatever gave that warning. but that's all they 
did. we could still have been killed.'

    'but we weren't,' answered tanya. 'we saved ourselves - by our own efforts. 
and perhaps that was the whole idea. if we hadn't - we wouldn't have been worth 
saving. you know, survival of the fittest. darwinian selection. eliminating the 
genes for stupidity.'

    'i've an unpleasant feeling you're right,' said curnow. 'and if we'd stuck 
to our launch date, and not used discovery as a booster, would it, or they, have 
done anything to save us? that wouldn't have required much extra effort for an 
intelligence that could blow up jupiter.'

    there was an uneasy silence, broken at last by heywood floyd.

    'on the whole,' he said, 'i'm very glad that's one question we'll never get 
answered.'



    54

    between suns



    the russians, thought floyd, are going to miss walter's songs and wisecracks 
on the way home. after the excitement of the last few days, the long fall 
sunward - and earthward - will seem a monotonous anticlimax. but a monotonous, 
uneventful trip was what everyone devoutly hoped for.

    he was already feeling sleepy, but was still aware of his surroundings and 
capable of reacting to them. will i look as dead when i'm in hibernation? he 
asked himself. it was always disconcerting to look at another person - 
especially someone very familiar - when he had entered the long sleep.

    perhaps it was too poignant a reminder of one's own mortality.

    curnow was completely out, but chandra was still awake, though already 
groggy from the final injection. he was obviously no longer himself, for he 
seemed quite unperturbed by his own nakedness or katerina's watchful presence. 
the gold lingam that was his only article of clothing kept trying to float away 
from him, until its chain recaptured it. 

    'everything going okay, katerina?' asked floyd.

    'perfectly. but how i envy you. in twenty minutes, you'll be home.'

    'if that's any consolation - how can you be sure we won't have some horrible 
dreams?'

    'no one's ever reported any.'

    'ah - they may forget them when they wake up.'

    katerina, as usual, took him quite seriously. 'impossible. if there were 
dreams in hibernation, the eeg records would have revealed them. okay, chandra - 
close your eyes. ah - there he goes. now it's your turn, heywood. the ship will 
seem very strange without you.'

    'thanks, katerina... hope you have a nice trip.'

    drowsy though he was, floyd became aware that surgeon-commander rudenko 
seemed a little uncertain, even - could it be? - shy. it looked as if she wanted 
to tell him something, but couldn't make up her mind.

    'what is it, katerina?' he said sleepily.

    'i haven't told anyone else yet - but you certainly won't be talking. here's 
a little surprise.'

    'you'd... better... hurry...'

    'max and zenia are going to get married.'

    'that... is... supposed... to... be... a... surprise?...'

    'no. it's just to prepare you. when we get back to earth, so are walter and 
i. what do you think of that?'

    now i understand why you were spending so much time together. yes, it is 
indeed a surprise... who would have thought it!

    'i'm... very... happy... to... hear...'

    floyd's voice faded out before he could complete the sentence. but he was 
not yet unconscious, and was still able to focus some of his dissolving 
intellect on this new situation.

    i really don't believe it, he said to himself. walter will probably change 
his mind before he wakes up.

    and then he had one final thought, just before he went to sleep himself. if 
walter does change his mind, he'd better not wake up.

    dr heywood floyd thought that was very funny. the rest of the crew often 
wondered why he was smiling all the way back to earth.



    55

    lucifer rising



    fifty times more brilliant than the full moon, lucifer had transformed the 
skies of earth, virtually banishing night for months at a time. despite its 
sinister connotations, the name was inevitable; and indeed 'light-bringer' had 
brought evil as well as good. only the centuries and the millennia would show in 
which direction the balance tilted.

    on the credit side, the end of night had vastly extended the scope of human 
activity, especially in the less-developed countries. everywhere, the need for 
artificial lighting had been substantially reduced, with resulting huge savings 
in electrical power. it was as if a giant lamp had been hoisted into space, to 
shine upon half the globe. even in daytime lucifer was a dazzling object, 
casting distinct shadows.

    farmers, mayors; city managers, police, seamen, and almost all those engaged 
in outdoor activities - especially in remote areas - welcomed lucifer; it had 
made their lives much safer and easier. but it was hated by lovers, criminals, 
naturalists, and astronomers.

    the first two groups found their activities seriously restricted, while 
naturalists were concerned about lucifer's impact upon animal life. many 
nocturnal creatures had been seriously affected, while others had managed to 
adapt. the pacific grunion, whose celebrated mating pattern was locked to high 
tides and moonless nights, was in grave trouble, and seemed to be heading for 
rapid extinction.

    and so, it seemed, were earth-based astronomers. that was not such a 
scientific catastrophe as it would once have been, for more than fifty per cent 
of astronomical research depended upon instruments in space or on the moon. they 
could be easily shielded from lucifer's glare; but terrestrial observatories 
were seriously inconvenienced by the new sun in what had once been the night 
sky.

    the human race would adapt, as it had done to so many changes in the past. a 
generation would soon be born that had never known a world without lucifer; but 
that brightest of all stars would be an eternal question to every thinking man 
and woman.

    why had jupiter been sacrificed - and how long would the new sun radiate? 
would it burn out quickly, or would it maintain its power for thousands of 
years- perhaps for the lifetime of the human race? above all, why the 
interdiction upon europa, a world now as cloud-covered as venus?

    there must be answers to those questions; and mankind would never be 
satisfied until it had found them.



    epilogue: 20,001

    and because, in all the galaxy, they had found nothing more precious than 
mind, they encouraged its dawning everywhere. they became farmers in the fields 
of stars; they sowed, and sometimes they reaped. and sometimes, dispassionately, 
they had to weed.

    only during the last few generations have the europans ventured into the 
farside, beyond the light and warmth of their never-setting sun, into the 
wilderness where the ice that once covered all their world may still be found. 
and even fewer have remained there to face the brief and fearful night that 
comes, when the brilliant but powerless cold sun sinks below the horizon.

    yet already, those few hardy explorers have discovered that the universe 
around them is stranger than they ever imagined. the sensitive eyes they 
developed in the dim oceans still serve them well; they can see the stars and 
the other bodies moving in their sky. they have begun to lay the foundations of 
astronomy, and some daring thinkers have, even surmised that the great world of 
europa is not the whole of creation.

    very soon after they had emerged from the ocean, during the explosively 
swift evolution forced upon them by the melting of the ice, they had realized 
that the objects in the sky fell into three distinct classes. most important, of 
course, was the sun. some legends - though few took them seriously - claimed 
that it had not always been there, but had appeared suddenly, heralding a brief, 
cataclysmic age of transformation, when much of europa's teeming life had been 
destroyed. if that was indeed true, it was a small price to pay for the benefits 
that poured down from the tiny, inexhaustible source of energy that hung 
unmoving in the sky.

    perhaps the cold sun was its distant brother, banished for some crime and 
condemned to march forever around the vault of heaven. it was of no importance 
except to those peculiar europans who were always asking questions about matters 
that all sensible folk took for granted.

    still, it must be admitted that those cranks had made some interesting 
discoveries during their excursions into the darkness of farside. they claimed - 
though this was hard to believe - that the whole sky was sprinkled with 
uncountable myriads of tiny lights, even smaller and feebler than the cold sun. 
they varied greatly in brilliance; and though they rose and set, they never 
moved from their fixed positions.

    against this background, there were three objects that did move, apparently 
obeying complex laws that no one had yet been able to fathom. and unlike all the 
others in the sky, they were quite large - though both shape and size varied 
continually. sometimes they were disks, sometimes half-circles, sometimes slim 
crescents. they were obviously closer than all the other bodies in the universe, 
for their surfaces showed an immense wealth of complex and ever-changing detail.

    the theory that they were indeed other worlds had at last been accepted - 
though no one except a few fanatics believed that they could be anything like as 
large, or as important, as europa. one lay toward the sun, and was in a constant 
state of turmoil. on its nightside could be seen the glow of great fires - a 
phenomenon still beyond the understanding of the europans, for their atmosphere, 
as yet, contains no oxygen. and sometimes vast explosions hurl clouds of debris 
up from the surface; if the sunward globe is indeed a world, it must be a very 
unpleasant place to live. perhaps even worse than the nightside of europa.

    the two outer, and more distant, spheres seem to be much less violent 
places, yet in some ways they are even more mysterious. when darkness falls upon 
their surfaces, they too show patches of light, but these are very different 
from the swiftly changing fires of the turbulent inner world. they burn with an 
almost steady brilliance, and are concentrated in a few small areas - though 
over the generations, these areas have grown, and multiplied.

    but strangest of all are the lights, fierce as tiny suns, that can often be 
observed moving across the darkness between these other worlds. once, recalling 
the bioluminescence of their own seas, some europans had speculated that these 
might indeed be living creatures; but their intensity makes that almost 
incredible. nevertheless, more and more thinkers believe that these lights - the 
fixed patterns, and moving suns - must be some strange manifestation of life.

    against this, however, there is one very potent argument. if they are living 
things, why do they never come to europa?

    yet there are legends. thousands of generations ago, soon after the conquest 
of the land, it is said that some of those lights came very close indeed - but 
they always exploded in sky-filling blasts that far outshone the sun. and 
strange, hard metals rained down upon the land; some of them are still 
worshipped to this day.

    none is as holy, though, as the huge, black monolith that stands on the 
frontier of eternal day, one side forever turned to the unmoving sun, the other 
facing into the land of night. ten times the height of the tallest europan - 
even when he raises his tendrils to the fullest extent - it is the very symbol 
of mystery and unattainability. for it has never been touched; it can only be 
worshipped from afar. around it lies the circle of power, which repels all who 
try to approach.

    it is that same power, many believe, that keeps at bay those moving lights 
in the sky. if it ever fails, they will descend upon the virgin continents and 
shrinking seas of europa, and their purpose will be revealed at last.



    the europans would be surprised to know with what intensity and baffled 
wonder that black monolith is also studied by the minds behind those moving 
lights. for centuries now their automatic probes have made a cautious descent 
from orbit - always with the same disastrous result. for until the time is ripe, 
the monolith will permit no contact.

    when that time comes - when, perhaps, the europans have invented radio and 
discovered the messages continually bombarding them from so close at hand - the 
monolith may change its strategy. it may - or it may not - choose to release the 
entities who slumber within it, so that they can bridge the gulf between the 
europans and the race to which they once held allegiance.

    and it may be that no such bridge is possible, and that two such alien forms 
of consciousness can never coexist. if this is so, then only one of them can 
inherit the solar system.

    which it will be, not even the gods know - yet.



    acknowledgements


    my first thanks, of course, must go to stanley kubrick, who a rather long 
time ago wrote to ask if i had any ideas for the 'proverbial good science-
fiction movie'.

    next, my appreciation to my friend and agent (the two are not always 
synonymous) scott meredith, for perceiving that a ten-page movie outline i sent 
him as an intellectual exercise had rather wider possibilities, and that i owed 
it to posterity, etc., etc.

    other thanks are due to:

    se?or jorge luiz calife of rio de janeiro, for a letter which started me 
thinking seriously about a possible sequel (after i'd said for years that one 
was clearly impossible).

    dr bruce murray, past director of the jet propulsion laboratory, pasadena, 
and dr frank jordan, also of jpl, for computing the lagrange-1 position in the 
io-jupiter system. oddly enough, i had made identical calculations thirty-four 
years earlier for the colinear earth-moon lagrange points ('stationary orbits', 
journal of the british astronomical association, december 1947) but i no longer 
trust my ability to solve quintic equations, even with the help of hal, jr., my 
trusty h/p 91ooa.

    new american library and hutchinson & co., publishers of 2001: a space 
odyssey, for permission to use the material in chapter 51 (chapter 37 of 2001: a 
space odyssey) and also quotations in chapters 30 and 40.

    general potter, us army corps of engineers, for finding time in his busy 
schedule to show me around epcot in 1969 - when it was only a few large holes in 
the ground.

    wendell solomons, for help with russian (and russlish).

    jean-michel jarre, vangelis, and the incomparable john williams, for 
inspiration whenever it was needed.

    c. p. cavafy for 'waiting for the barbarians'.



    while writing this book, i discovered that the concept of refuelling on 
europa had been discussed in a paper, 'outer planet satellite return missions 
using in situ propellant production', by ash, stancati, niehoff, and cuda (acta 
astronautica viii, 5-6, may-june 1981).

    the idea of automatically exponentiating systems (von neumann machines) for 
extraterrestrial mining has been seriously developed by von tiesenhausen and 
darbro at nasa's marshall space flight center (see 'self-replicating systems' - 
nasa technical memorandum 78304). if anyone doubts the power of such systems to 
cope with jupiter, i refer them to the study showing how self-replicating 
factories could cut production time for a solar power collector from 60,000 
years to a mere twenty.

    the startling idea that gas giants might have diamond cores has been 
seriously put forward by m. ross and f. ree of the lawrence livermore 
laboratory, university of california, for the cases of uranus and neptune. it 
seems to me that anything they can do, jupiter could do better. de beers 
shareholders, please note.

    for more details on the aerial life forms that might exist in the jovian 
atmosphere, see my story 'a meeting with medusa' (in the wind from the sun). 
such creatures have been beautifully depicted by adolf schaller in part 2 of 
carl sagan's cosmos ('one voice in the cosmic fugue'), both book and tv series.

    the fascinating idea that there might be life on europa, beneath ice-covered 
oceans kept liquid by the same jovian tidal forces that heat io, was first 
proposed by richard c. hoagland in the magazine star and sky ('the europa 
enigma', january 1980). this quite brilliant concept has been taken seriously by 
a number of astronomers (notably nasa's institute of space studies' dr robert 
jastrow), and may provide one of the best motives for the projected galileo 
mission.



    and finally: valerie and hector, for providing the life-support system;
    cherene, for punctuating every chapter with sticky kisses;
    steve, for being here.



colombo, sri lanka
july 1981-march 1982